
--- Page 206 ---
CHAPTER	10
Mastering	Personal	Relationships
One	of	the	characteristics	of	the	fully	mature,	self-actualizing	person	is	that	he	or	she	has
the	ability	to	enter	into	long-term,	intimate	relationships	and	maintain	those	relationships
for	long	periods	of	time.	Men	and	women	with	the	healthiest	personalities,	those	who	are
the	most	
together
	as	human	beings,	are	those	who	seem	to	have	the	greatest	capacity	for
these	loving	relationships.
The	choice	of	a	mate,	and	the	quality	of	your	home	and	family	life,	determines	your
success	as	a	human	being	as	much	as	or	more	than	any	other	factor.	Your	relationships	are
a	direct	expression	of	the	person	you	really	are.	The	Law	of	Correspondence	states	that
your	outer	world	of	relationships	will	correspond	exactly	to	your	inner	world	of	thought
and	feeling.	If	your	inner	world	is	positive	and	loving,	your	outer	world	of	relationships
will	be	happy	and	satisfying.
Benjamin	Disraeli,	prime	minister	of	England	in	the	nineteenth	century,	once	said,	“No
success	in	public	life	can	compensate	for	failure	in	the	home.”	Your	personal	relationships
should	take	precedence	over	everything	else.	As	you	grow	and	become	a	better	person,
your	relationships	should	grow	and	improve	as	well,	and	in	the	same	proportion.
By	the	Law	of	Attraction,	you	will	attract	into	your	life	the	kind	of	people	who	are	very
much	 the	 way	 you	 are,	 the	 kind	 of	 people	 whose	 ways	 of	 thinking	 and	 behaving
correspond	 to	 your	 dominant	 thoughts	 and	 feelings.	 As	 you	 become	 more	 positive,
optimistic	and	loving,	you	will	naturally	attract	into	your	life	more	positive,	optimistic	and
loving	people.
By	the	Law	of	Sowing	and	Reaping	you	will	reap	exactly	what	you	sow,	and	there	is	no
area	in	which	this	is	more	true	than	in	your	relationships.	You	see	it	all	around	you,	in	all
your	interactions	with	others.
You	get	out	of	your	marriage	or	your	romance	exactly	what	you	put	into	it.	The	more	of
yourself	that	you	put	into	a	relationship,	the	more	love,	satisfaction	and	joy	you	will	get
out	of	it.	Men	and	women	are	born	incomplete,	and	need	each	other	to	become	whole.
They	are	born	with	complementary	qualities	and	characteristics.	Each	one	needs	the	other
to	fulfill	his	or	her	human	destiny.	Happy	relationships	go	hand	in	hand	with	peace	of
mind,	 long	 life,	 health,	 happiness	 and	 abundance.	 Men	 and	 women	 with	 poor
relationships,	or	no	relationships	at	all,	have	more	ill	health	and	die	younger	than	men	and
women	who	live	happily	together.
In	fact,	according	to	Ronald	Adler	and	Neil	Towne	in	their	book	
Looking	Out,	Looking
In
,	socially	isolated	people	are	two	to	three	times	as	likely	to	die	prematurely	as	those	with
strong	social	ties.	Divorced	men	die	from	heart	disease,	cancer	and	strokes	at	double	the
rate	of	married	men.	The	rate	of	all	types	of	cancer	is	as	much	as	five	times	higher	for
--- Page 207 ---
divorced	men	and	women,	compared	to	their	single	counterparts.	If	for	no	other	reason
than	your	desire	to	live	a	long	and	happy	life,	you	should	be	very	serious	about	building
and	maintaining	excellent	relationships	with	the	most	important	people	in	your	life.
WHERE	IT	BEGINS
Your	self-esteem,	how	much	you	like	and	respect	yourself,	determines	your	personality
and	your	level	of	happiness.	High	self-esteem	leads	to	high	performance	and	success	in
every	area	of	life,	while	low	self-esteem	precedes	and	accompanies	most	failure	and
frustration.
The	first	part	of	self-esteem	is	the	purely	
emotional
	component,	the	way	you	feel	about
yourself,	separate	and	apart	from	anyone	or	anything	else.	The	second	part	of	your	self-
esteem	is	determined	by	your	perceived	level	of	
competence
	in	what	you	do.	It	is	how	well
you	feel	you	perform	in	the	important	areas	of	your	life.	This	is	called	
performance-based
self-esteem
,	and	it	is	an	essential	element	of	your	personality.
When	you	feel	that	you	are	good	at	what	you	do,	that	you	
perform	well,	you	enjoy	high
self-esteem	in	that	area.	This	feeling	reinforces	the	other	component	of	self-esteem,	your
sense	of	personal	value.	If	you	do	well,	you	feel	good;	if	you	feel	good,	you	do	well.	Each
is	dependent	on	the	other.
Because	your	relationships	are	so	central	to	your	entire	life,	for	you	to	enjoy	sustained
feelings	of	self-esteem,	you	must	know	in	your	heart	that	you	are	capable	of	entering	into
and	 maintaining	 a	 positive,	 healthy	 and	 constructive	 loving	 relationship	 with	 another
person.
Feeling	inferior	or	incompetent	in	your	relationships	undermines	your	self-esteem	and
self-confidence.	Everything	you	do	that	enables	you	to	get	along	better	with	the	important
people	in	your	life	improves	your	self-esteem.	Effectiveness	with	others	makes	you	feel
more	competent	and	complete	and	frees	you	to	more	readily	become	more	effective	in	the
other	areas	of	your	life.
There	is	a	direct	relationship	between	the	
quality
	of	your	relationships	and	your	
level
	of
self-esteem	and	self-acceptance.	You	can	only	like	yourself	to	the	degree	to	which	you
fully	accept	yourself,	and	how	much	you	like	yourself	is	largely	determined	by	how	much
you	feel	you	are	accepted	by	other	people.
Most	of	us	are	raised	with	a	form	of	
conditional
	acceptance,	and	often	rejection	and
disapproval	from	our	parents.	As	adults,	we	seek	the	unconditional	love	and	acceptance	of
others,	and	especially	
one
	special	other,	to	compensate	for	what	we	feel	we	lacked	as
children.	Our	mental	health	depends	on	it.
SELF-ACCEPTANCE
You	can	never	feel	free	to	genuinely	like	yourself	until	you	accept	yourself	completely,
until	you	accept	both	your	strengths	
and
	your	weaknesses.	And	the	key	to	
accepting
yourself	is
	being	accepted	unconditionally	by	at	least	one	other	person	whom	you	respect
and	admire,	and	even	better,	love.	It	is	only	when	someone	else	accepts	you,	“warts	and
--- Page 208 ---
all,”	that	you	can	relax	and	accept	yourself	as	being	a	valuable	and	worthwhile	person.
SELF-AWARENESS
For	you	to	experience	self-acceptance,	you	must	first	develop	
selfawareness
.	You	need	to
understand	
why
	you	think,	feel	and	act	the	
way	you	do.	You	need	to	be	aware	of	the
impact	of	the	formative	experiences	of	your	life.	You	need	to	understand	how	and	why
you	have	become	the	person	that	you	are	today.
Only	when	you	achieve	a	higher	level	of	self-awareness	can	you	move	to	a	higher	level
of	self-acceptance.	You	must	to	be	more	aware	of	who	you	really	are	before	you	can
accept	yourself.	And	it	is	only	with	a	high	level	of	self-acceptance	that	you	can	enjoy	self-
esteem—the	key	to	a	happy,	healthy	personality.
SELF-DISCLOSURE
Self-awareness,	in	turn,	is	based	on	
self-disclosure
.	You	only	truly	understand	yourself	to
the	degree	to	which	you	can	disclose,	or	share	yourself,	with	at	least	one	other	person.
Appropriate
	 self-disclosure	 means	 that	 you	 can	 tell	 someone	 else,	 whom	 you	 trust
completely,	exactly	what	you	are	thinking	and	feeling,	with	no	fear	of	disapproval	or
rejection.
Psychotherapy	is	based	on	self-disclosure.	Psychotherapists	are	successful	to	the	degree
to	which	they	can	get	the	patient	to	open	up	to	them	and	tell	them	exactly	what	is	causing
them	to	be	unhappy	or	ineffective.
One	psychologist	said	recently,	“If	everyone	learned	to	really	listen	to	other	people,	75
percent	 of	 the	 psychotherapists	 in	 the	 United	 States	 would	 be	 out	 of	 work	 by	 next
Wednesday.”	To	honestly	disclose	yourself	to	another	person,	you	need	to	trust	that	other
person.	You	need	to	know	that	the	other	person	cares	for	you,	and	that	he	or	she	will	not
judge	you	or	condemn	you	for	something	you	have	said	or	done	in	the	past.
The	great	emotional	problem	of	the	twentieth	century	is	guilt.	Guilt	arises	from	a
feeling	of	worthlessness	as	the	result	of	destructive	criticism	and	mistakes	you	feel	you
have	made	in	the	past.	Most	of	us	have	done	and	said	things	we	regret.	We	have	hurt	other
people,	and	we	are	sorry	about	it.	We	can	begin	to	free	ourselves	from	these	negative
feelings	by	the	act	of	telling	someone	else	what	we	did	or	said.	This	form	of	catharsis,	or
cleansing,	liberates	us	and	allows	us	to	get	on	with	the	rest	of	our	lives.	Repentance	is	not
only	good,	but	essential	for	the	soul,	for	long-term	happiness.
Honest	self-disclosure	is	sometimes	scary.	It	requires	that	you	take	a	chance,	that	you
make	yourself	vulnerable.	But	it	is	the	basic	
precondition	for	mental	health.	When	you
disclose	your	thoughts	and	feelings	openly	and	honestly	to	another	person,	you	understand
yourself	better.	You	become	more	aware	of	who	you	really	are.	You	see	yourself	and	your
life	in	a	better	perspective.
As	you	become	more	self-aware,	you	become	more	self-accepting.	When	you	accept
yourself	unconditionally,	you	enjoy	higher	levels	of	self-esteem	and	self-regard.	You	feel
better	about	yourself	in	everything	you	do.	You	liberate	yourself	from	negative	feelings
--- Page 209 ---
that	can	hold	you	down	and	hold	you	back.	With	self-disclosure,	you	can	get	things	off
your	chest	and	get	on	with	your	life.
INTIMACY	AND	GROWTH	GO	HAND	IN	HAND
One	of	the	purposes	of	marriage	and	intimate	relationships	is	to	give	you	the	opportunity
to	evolve	and	grow	to	your	full	capacity.	In	a	fully	trusting	relationship,	you	feel	free	to
tell	the	other	person	things	you	have	done	in	the	past	and	what	you	are	thinking	and
feeling	in	the	present.	In	sharing	yourself	honestly,	you	develop	a	deeper	understanding	of
your	own	humanity.	You	become	more	tolerant,	more	accepting	and	more	compassionate
toward	the	human	frailties	of	other	people.	You	develop	parts	of	your	personality	that
would	have	lain	dormant	in	the	absence	of	a	fully	loving	relationship.
Much	of	what	we	do	in	life	we	do	either	to	get	love	or	to	compensate	for	the	lack	of
love.	Everyone	needs	to	be	loved	and	accepted	unconditionally	by	at	least	one	other
person.	It	is	only	when	your	need	for	this	form	of	emotional	security	has	been	satisfied
that	you	feel	free	to	turn	your	mind	and	heart	to	accomplishing	what	is	possible	for	you	in
your	external	life.	Love	is	like	money:	If	you	have	an	ample	supply,	you	don’t	think	about
it	very	much.	But	if	your	supply	is	cut	off	for	any	period	of	time,	you	think	about	nothing
else.
The	cruelest	punishment	inflicted	on	prisoners	is	locking	them	away	from	all	other
human	 beings—putting	 them	 in	 solitary	 confinement.	 Depriving	 a	 person	 of	 human
contact,	of	human	interaction,	is	the	worst	thing	that	can	be	done	to	him	or	her.
Your	highest	aspiration	should	be	to	evolve	and	develop	into	the	kind	of	person	who
attracts	an	ideal	loving	relationship	into	
your	life.	This	relationship	makes	it	possible	for
you	to	enjoy	the	happiness	and	joy	for	which	you	were	created.
Everything	in	the	previous	chapter	on	mastering	human	relationships	is	applicable	to
your	loving	relationships.	In	addition,	there	are	many	other	things	you	can	do,	or	stop
doing,	that	can	dramatically	improve	the	way	you	get	along	with	the	important	other
person	in	your	life.	Let’s	start	off	with	the	six	rules	for	success	in	relationships.
SIX	RULES	FOR	SUCCESSFUL	RELATIONSHIPS
The	first	rule	is	that	
similarities	attract
.	You	will	always	be	the	happiest	and	the	most
compatible	with	another	person	whose	interests,	tastes	and	values	are	similar	to	yours.
The	Law	of	Attraction	states	that	you	will	be	attracted	to	a	person	whose	attitudes	and
beliefs	are	in	harmony	with	your	own.
The	first	area	in	which	similarities	are	necessary	in	marriages	and	relationships	is	in
attitudes	toward	money—how	it	is	earned,	how	it	is	saved	and	how	it	is	spent.	The	second
area	is	attitudes	regarding	children—whether	to	have	them,	how	many,	and	how	to	raise
them.	The	third	is	attitudes	toward	sex.	The	fourth	is	religion,	and	the	fifth	is	attitudes
toward	political	and	social	issues.	Attitudes	toward	people,	social	activities	and	how	to
spend	leisure	time	are	also	important	measures	of	compatibility.	Similarities	attract	in
spiritual	areas	as	well,	and	this	area	can	sometimes	be	more	important	than	any	other.
--- Page 210 ---
In	 each	 case,	 you	 will	 be	 most	 happy	 and	 most	 compatible	 with	 a	 person	 whose
fundamental	 beliefs	 and	 values	 in	 these	 areas	 are	 most	 similar	 to	 your	 own.	 Most
unhappiness	and	disagreements	in	marriages	and	relationships	come	down	to	fundamental
disagreements	about	these	basic	issues	of	life.
The	 second	 rule	 for	 success	 in	 relationships	 is	 that	
opposites	 attract
,	 but	 only	 in
temperament.	 Nature	 always	 demands	 balance	 and	 harmony.	 And	 balance	 is	 most
necessary	in	the	temperaments	of	two	people	who	have	come	together	as	one.
There	is	a	simple	test	of	compatibility	you	can	apply	to	your	intimate	relationships.	It	is
called	 “the	 conversation	 test.”	 In	 a	 relationship	 in	 which	 you	 are	 temperamentally
compatible	with	another	
person,	there	will	be	an	easy	ebb	and	flow	of	conversation.	Each
person	will	be	able	to	talk	as	much	as	he	or	she	needs	to	talk,	and	each	person	will	have
the	opportunity	to	listen	as	much	as	he	or	she	needs	to	listen.
This	balance	is	very	important.	Each	person	has	a	certain	amount	of	talking	that	he	or
she	must	do	to	feel	healthy	and	whole.	If	people	do	not	get	the	opportunity	to	do	all	of
their	talking	with	the	person	with	whom	they	are	involved,	they	will	seek	to	fulfill	their
communication	needs	somewhere	else.	Almost	all	affairs	in	marriages	begin	as	the	result
of	a	need	to	communicate	more	fully	with	another	human	being.
When	people	are	temperamentally	balanced,	90	percent	of	the	time	they	spend	together
will	be	filled	with	easy	conversation,	going	back	and	forth.	The	other	10	percent	of	the
time	will	be	filled	with	comfortable	silences.
However,	if	one	person	needs	to	talk	70	percent	of	the	time	and	listen	only	20	percent
of	the	time,	and	the	other	person	also	needs	to	talk	70	percent	of	the	time	and	listen	only
20	percent	of	the	time,	there	will	be	a	clash	over	what	is	called	“air	time.”	They	will	be
continually	struggling	over	who	is	going	to	get	to	talk	the	most,	who	is	going	to	fulfill	his
or	her	needs	at	the	expense	of	the	other.
In	this	type	of	relationship,	there	will	be	one	person	who	loves	
more
	and	one	person
who	loves	
less
.	Always,	the	person	who	loves	more	will	bite	his	or	her	lip	and	give	in	to
allow	the	person	who	loves	less	to	do	all	the	talking	he	or	she	wants	to	do.	The	person
who	loves	less	controls	the	relationship.
However,	this	is	only	a	temporary	solution.	It	inevitably	leads	to	feelings	of	frustration
and	unhappiness	on	the	part	of	the	person	who	loves	more,	and	who	is	not	getting	an
opportunity	to	express	himself	or	herself	fully	enough.	Eventually	these	repressed	feelings
erupt	in	health	problems	or	harmful	behavior.
Another	example	of	incompatibility	is	when	both	parties	only	need	to	talk	30	percent	of
the	time	and	are	comfortable	listening	60	or	70	percent	of	the	time.	In	this	case,	you	would
have	40	percent	of	the	time	the	couple	is	together	filled	with	uncomfortable	silences.	The
two	people	would	sit	there	with	very	little	to	say,	feeling	uncomfortable	but	not	knowing
how	to	break	the	silence.	This,	too,	is	an	example	of	temperamental	incompatibility.
The	conversation	test	can	be	applied	to	your	relationships	with	any	of	your	friends,	on
any	level,	and	of	either	sex.	Your	very	best	friends	are	those	with	whom	you	have	easy
conversations	and	easy	silences.	These	are	the	ones	with	whom	you	are	most	compatible.
But	it	is	
most
	important	that	you	be	conversationally	compatible	with	your	mate	or	your
--- Page 211 ---
spouse	if	you	want	to	be	happy	in	your	relationship.
The	third	rule	for	successful	relationships	is	
total	commitment
	on	the	part	of	both	people.
Total	commitment	requires	a	heartfelt	determination	to	make	the	relationship	successful.
If	the	two	are	compatible	in	their	basic	values	and	attitudes	and	are	temperamentally
balanced,	it	is	much	easier	for	them	to	make	a	lifelong	commitment.	A	total	commitment
means	that	neither	party	ever	considers	or	discusses	the	possibility	of	separating,	breaking
up	or	divorcing.	Making	a	total	commitment	requires	that	you	burn	your	physical	and
emotional	bridges	and	refuse	to	consider	any	other	option	except	making	this	relationship
successful.
Many	people	avoid	making	a	total	commitment	to	a	relationship,	even	a	marriage,
because	they	have	been	hurt	in	previous	relationships.	They	feel	that	if	they	keep	their
options	open,	they	will	always	have	an	emotional	escape	route.	This	lack	of	commitment,
however,	leads	almost	invariably	to	creating	the	exact	situation	that	the	individual	fears.
The	relationship	gradually	deteriorates	as	one	or	both	parties	continue	to	hold	back	and	to
think	of	separation	as	the	solution	to	the	problems	that	inevitably	arise	between	two
people.
W.	Scott	Peck,	in	his	book	
The	Road	Less	Traveled
,	gives	a	beautiful	definition	of	love.
He	says,	
“Love	is	the	total	commitment	to	the	full	development	of	the	potential	of	the
other.”
	When	you	truly	love	another	person,	you	want	that	person	to	fulfill	his	or	her	full
potential,	and	to	become	everything	that	he	or	she	is	capable	of	becoming.	If	one	or	the
other	has	the	slightest	reluctance	or	hesitation	in	creating	or	supporting	every	opportunity
for	his	or	her	mate	to	grow	and	develop,	what	you	have	might	be	a	relationship,	but	it	is
probably	not	real	love.
A	wonderful	thing	about	human	beings	is	that	we	are	
free
	emotionally	only	when	we
have	given	up	all	other	options	and	committed	ourselves	whole-heartedly	to	one	other
person.	It	is	only	then	
that	we	are	capable	of	developing	the	high-quality	relationship	that
we	need	to	complete	our	evolution	as	human	beings.
The	fourth	rule	for	successful	relationships	is	
liking
.	 It	 is	 more	 important	 and	 more
satisfying	to	genuinely	like	your	partner	than	to	be	in	love.	In	a	long-term	relationship,
people	may	fall	in	and	out	of	love.	The	kind	and	intensity	of	emotion	that	each	feels	for
the	other	will	vary	with	the	passing	of	time.	But	if	the	two	people	like	and	respect	each
other,	the	relationship	can	endure	indefinitely.
When	 one	 person	 stops	 liking	 or	 respecting	 the	 other	 person,	 for	 any	 reason,	 the
relationship	is	usually	over.	Many	couples	fall	in	love	and	then	break	up	and	never	speak
to	each	other	again	because	they	never	took	the	time	to	fall	in	like,	to	learn	to	genuinely
like	and	respect	the	other	person	as	an	individual	rather	than	just	as	a	romantic	partner.
Marriages	and	relationships	may	not	work	out,	but	if	they	were	initially	based	on	liking
and	respect,	the	two	parties	can	still	communicate	and	interact	on	an	adult	level	without
the	negative	feelings	that	go	with	relationships	that	ended	in	which	no	real	liking	or
respect	ever	existed.
THE	BEST	FRIEND	TEST
--- Page 212 ---
An	excellent	way	to	tell	if	you	are	in	the	right	relationship	is	“the	best-friend	test.”	In	the
ideal	relationship,	your	mate	will	be	your	best	friend.	There	will	be	no	one	in	the	world
that	you	would	rather	be	with,	share	with,	talk	to	or	spend	time	with	than	your	spouse.
If	for	any	reason	you	do	not	feel	that	your	spouse	or	mate	is	your	best	friend,	if	you	do
not	feel	that	you	would	rather	be	with	him	or	her	than	anyone	else,	it	is	an	indication	that
something	is	wrong	in	the	relationship.
In	every	interview	with	couples	who	have	been	together	for	a	long	time,	both	the	man
and	the	woman	describe	the	other	as	their	
very	best	friend	in	the	world
.
The	starting	point	of	a	long-term	romantic	relationship	is	the	feeling	that	you	have	
met
your	best	friend.	One	of	the	indications	of	this	is	the	amount	you	laugh	together.	The
amount	of	laughter	in	a	relationship	is	a	measure	of	the	health	of	that	relationship.	When
two	people	are	ideally	suited,	they	laugh	a	lot	together,	and	
at	the	same	things.	When	two
people	are	unsuited	for	any	reason,	they	won’t	find	much	in	common	to	laugh	about.	Their
senses	of	humor	will	be	different.
The	fifth	rule	for	successful	relationships	is	that	
similar	self-concepts	attract
	and	are	most
compatible.	You	will	always	be	attracted	to,	and	be	most	compatible	with,	a	person	who	is
just	about	as	happy	and	as	positive	as	you	are.
The	general	tone	of	the	relationship,	the	general	level	of	optimism	versus	pessimism,	is
a	good	measure	of	the	compatibility	of	self-concepts.	Interestingly	enough,	people	with
negative
	self-concepts	will	be	attracted	to	each	other	just	as	will	people	with	
positive
	self-
concepts.	They	will	marry,	settle	down	and	be	quite	content	together	for	many	years,	if	not
for	life.	Their	relationship	will	be	based	on	the	fact	that	they	are	both	largely	negative
personalities.	Similar	self-concepts	attract,	whatever	they	are.
Give	your	mate	a	score	on	a	scale	of	1	to	100.	Estimate	what	percentage	of	the	time	he
or	she	is	positive	and	optimistic	versus	what	percentage	of	the	time	he	or	she	is	negative	or
pessimistic.	Then	give	yourself	the	same	test.
You	will	find	that	you	are	the	most	comfortable	with	a	person	who	is	pretty	much	as
happy,	or	as	unhappy,	as	you	are.	That’s	why	it	is	said,	“Birds	of	a	feather	flock	together,”
and	“Misery	loves	company.”
If	two	people	enter	into	a	relationship	and	one	of	them	is	much	happier	than	the	other,
there	will	be	all	kinds	of	conflict	and	unhappiness.	Most	relationships	and	marriages	that
break	up	do	so	as	the	result	of	self-concepts	being	out	of	balance.
In	one	study,	researchers	found	that	four	out	of	five	divorces	in	America	are	initiated	by
women	who	are	“mad	as	hell	and	not	going	to	take	it	anymore.”	It’s	amazing	how	many
husbands	and	wives	feel	that	they	are	being	held	back	because	of	the	negativity	of	their
spouses.	This	is	a	serious	problem	in	relationships	in	America	today,	and	there	is	no
simple	solution	for	it.
The	sixth	rule	for	successful	relationships	is	that	there	must	
be	good	communications
.	The
primary	reason	for	the	success	of	marriages	is	that	the	two	partners	communicate	well
with	each	other.	They	are	on	the	same	wavelength.	Each	can	sense	what	the	other	is
feeling	
and	thinking.	They	come	to	the	same	conclusions	independently.	They	almost
seem	to	“share	a	brain.”
--- Page 213 ---
The	primary	reason	for	the	failure	of	relationships	is	poor	communication.	The	couple
misunderstand	each	other	and	continually	argue	about	large	and	small	issues.	Each	is
convinced	that	he	or	she	is	right	and	the	other	is	wrong.	They	have	a	hard	time	with	the
idea	that	both	viewpoints	might	be	correct,	rightly	considered.
To	build	and	maintain	a	high	level	of	quality	communications	in	a	relationship,	you
require	both	a	high	
quantity
	and	a	high	
quality
	of	unbroken	time	with	each	other.	Couples
need	to	be	alone	together.	They	need	to	spend	long	stretches	of	time	talking	and	listening
in	order	to	keep	their	communication	channels	clear.	Whenever	two	people	get	so	busy
that	they	stop	taking	time	to	talk,	you	can	be	sure	that	there	are	troubles	ahead.
Good	communications	require	both	speaking	and	listening	skills,	which	you	can	learn.
But	
excellent
	communications	between	a	man	and	a	woman	also	require	an	understanding
of	the	major	differences	between	them.
VIVE	LA	DIFFÉRENCE
Men	 and	 women	 are	 different	 in	 many	 ways	 and	 they	 have	 distinctly	 different
communication	styles.	Generally,	men	are	
direct
	and	women	are	
indirect
.	Men	are	more
focused	on	results	and	completion,	or	closure,	than	women.	Women	are	more	concerned
about	relationships	and	the	process	of	communication	than	men.	This	can	often	lead	to
fundamental	misunderstandings.
Take	the	case	of	a	man	and	a	woman	who	have	been	driving	for	two	or	three	hours.	As
they	go	past	a	McDonald’s,	the	woman	says,	“Honey,	are	you	thirsty?”
The	man,	without	looking	around,	simply	says,	“Nope,”	and	continues	driving.	She
bites	her	lip	and	feels	hurt	at	his	insensitivity.	He	is	blithely	unaware	of	what	she	was
really	asking,	and	he	has	no	idea	that	she	is	now	unhappy.
In	her	indirect	way,	she	was	saying,	“I	am	thirsty;	why	don’t	we	stop	and	get	something
to	drink?”	However,	because	of	the	way	she	phrased	it,	it	went	over	his	head	completely.
He	missed	the	point.
Another	example	of	this	difference	in	communication	styles	is	
shopping.	For	a	man,
going	shopping	is	a	simple	process	with	an	expected	result.	He	goes	in,	he	purchases	what
he	came	for,	and	he	leaves.	Men	in	general	don’t	like	shopping;	they	feel	uncomfortable
doing	it	and	they	want	to	get	it	over	with	as	quickly	as	possible.	The	ideal	shopping	trip
for	a	man	is	dashing	in	and	dashing	out,	leaving	his	car	running	in	the	parking	lot.
For	many	women,	however,	shopping	is	a	process,	even	a	recreational	activity.	A
woman	does	not	necessarily	even	have	to	buy	anything.
Shopping	is	a	sensory	experience	for	a	woman,	and	when	she	is	shopping	with	another
person,	it	becomes	a	social	experience	as	well.	The	conversation	that	takes	place	is	as
important	as,	if	not	more	important	than,	what	she	buys.	This	is	something	that	men	have	a
hard	time	understanding.
Here	is	another	example	of	this	difference	in	communication	styles.	Men	are	oriented
toward	closure	and	completion.	When	a	woman	begins	discussing	a	problem	with	him,	he
will	almost	immediately	respond	with	what	he	considers	to	be	a	logical	solution.
--- Page 214 ---
He	will	say,	“Why	don’t	you	do	this	or	try	that?”	He	will	then	go	back	to	reading	his
newspaper,	or	turn	his	attention	to	something	else.	He	will	honestly	feel	he	has	been
helpful	and	has	properly	addressed	the	issue:	her	problem.
What	he	does	not	realize	is	that	the	woman	is	usually	not	asking	for	a	solution,	nor	does
she	want	his	advice	or	his	recommendations.	What	she	wants	is	an	opportunity	to	discuss
the	situation,	to	process	the	problem	through	a	
dialogue
	about	it	with	the	man	in	her	life.
She	probably	already	knows	what	she	is	going	to	do,	or	not	do.	What	she	seeks	is	an
opportunity	to	communicate,	using	this	particular	situation	or	problem	as	the	basis	for	the
conversation.
One	of	the	things	that	men	can	do	to	improve	their	communications	with	the	women	in
their	lives	is	simply	to	refrain	from	giving	advice	unless	it	is	clear	that	this	is	what	she
wants.	Instead,	listen	attentively,	pause,	ask	questions,	feed	back	and	paraphrase	what	she
is	saying	to	ensure	you	understand.
ASK	HER	ABOUT	HER	DAY
One	of	the	best	things	a	man	can	do	when	he	comes	home	at	night,	or	when	they	get
together	in	the	evening,	is	to	ask	her	about	her	day.
Most	men	consider	their	workday	to	be	the	most	fascinating	experience	since	the	dawn
of	civilization.	However,	when	a	man	asks	his	mate	about	her	day	before	he	volunteers
anything	about	his	day,	he	is	often	amazed	at	how	much	
more
	interesting	her	day	was	than
his.
The	first	time	a	man	asks	the	woman	he	cares	about	to	tell	him	about	her	day,	she	will
probably	be	shocked,	and	she	may	give	a	brief,	dismissive	answer.	She	won’t	really
believe	that	he	is	really	interested.	She’ll	think	he’s	just	being	nice.	So	he	must	persist.
When	she	says,	Well,	I	went	to	work	and	I	had	lunch	with	so-and-so	and	then	I	came
home,	he	must	ask	her,	like	a	detective,	What	did	you	do	this	morning?	Where	did	you	go
for	lunch?	What	did	you	do	after	that?	What	did	you	do	this	afternoon?	How	is	everything
going	with	that	person	at	your	work?	and	so	on.	If	he	pries	a	little	bit	into	her	day,	he	will
find	that	it	is	often	as	interesting	as	anything	he	did.
An	advantage	of	this	approach	is	that	he	spends	less	time	talking	about	his	work	after
she	 has	 had	 a	 chance	 to	 talk	 about	 her	 day.	 Remember,	 it	 is	 not	 the	 content	 of	 the
conversation	that	is	important.	It	is	the	
process
.	Expressing	a	genuine	interest	in	your	mate
or	spouse	and	then	listening	carefully	to	the	other	person	when	he	or	she	speaks,	deepens
understanding	and	improves	communications.	It	is	only	in	this	way	that	you	can	keep	the
relationship	alive	and	growing.
THE	KEY	QUESTION
The	 most	 important	 question	 for	 you	 to	 ask	 and	 answer	 continually	 to	 maintain	 a
successful	relationship	is,	“What’s	important	here?”
What’s	important	is	not	winning	the	argument,	or	being	right,	but	maintaining	the
quality	of	the	relationship.	What’s	important	is	that	you	continue	to	love	and	respect	each
--- Page 215 ---
other	and	live	together	in	peace	and	harmony.
When	you	continually	ask,	“What’s	important	here?”	you	see	things	more	clearly	and
you	will	be	guided	to	do	and	say	what	is	most	appropriate.
Practice	the	golden	rule	of	relationships.	Ask	yourself,	regularly,	“What	would	it	be
like	to	be	married	to	me?”	Or	“What	would	it	be	like	if	my	mate	treated	me	the	way	I	treat
him	or	her?”
If	you	do	to	your	mate	what	you	would	like	to	see	done	to	you,	and	if	you	refrain	from
doing	or	saying	anything	that	you	would	not	like	your	mate	to	do	or	say	to	you,	you	will
be	far	more	aware	of	the	impact	of	your	words	and	behavior.
Awareness	is	really	the	key.	Life	is	the	study	of	attention.	If	you	pay	attention	to	the
small	things	in	your	relationship,	the	big	things	will	take	care	of	themselves.
SIX	PROBLEMS	IN	RELATIONSHIPS,	AND	HOW	TO
SOLVE	THEM
There	are	a	thousand	reasons	why	relationships	don’t	work	out,	but	you	can	probably	boil
them	down	to	
six
	 major	 problem	 areas.	 These	 six	 problems	 lie	 at	 the	 root	 of	 most
arguments,	disagreements	and	divorces.	All	of	them	have	to	do	with	the	self-esteem	and
self-image	of	one	or	both	of	the	parties	in	the	relationship.
The	first	major	problem	in	relationships	is	
lack	of	commitment
.	This	is	evident	in	the	“go
halfway”	relationship	or	marriage	so	common	today.	Instead	of	full	commitment,	there	is
only	partial	or	half	commitment.	One	or	the	other	says,	“You	go	halfway	and	I’ll	go
halfway.”	However,	as	soon	as	one	party	decides	to	go	only	49	percent	of	the	way,	a	split
opens	in	the	relationship.	And	this	kind	of	split	tends	to	grow	wider	rather	than	narrower.
The	parties	dig	in.	One	or	the	other	then	goes	only	48	percent	of	the	way,	then	40	percent,
then	30	percent	and	so	on	until	he	or	she	stops	trying	altogether.
You	see	an	example	of	this	when	a	couple	gets	married	but	each	keeps	a	separate	bank
account.	 The	 household	 expenses	 are	 divided	 equally.	 Every	 dollar	 is	 counted	 as
belonging	to	one	or	the	other.	They	even	lend	each	other	money	and	keep	accurate	tallies
of	who	owes	what	to	whom.	I	saw	one	case	in	which	household	expenses	were	divided
down	to	the	penny,	even	including	the	cost	of	a	postage	stamp	to	mail	the	utility	bill!
Two	friends	of	mine,	let’s	call	them	Mary	and	Joe,	lived	together	for	eleven	years.	They
always	talked	about	getting	married,	but	they	never	seemed	to	be	able	to	make	a	decision.
However,	from	the	time	they	moved	in	together,	each	person	purchased	and	paid	for
furniture	and	fixtures	for	the	apartment	separately	from	the	other.	On	the	back	of	every
item	in	their	apartment	was	a	little	sticker	indicating	who	it	belonged	to.	They	never
commingled	their	funds	or	their	property.	At	the	end	of	eleven	years,	when	they	decided	to
separate,	they	were	able	to	divide	all	their	possessions	in	less	than	two	hours.	They	had
unconsciously	been	planning	to	go	their	separate	ways	for	eleven	years	by	their	very	act	of
never	fully	committing	to	the	relationship.
Another	 example	 of	 partial	 commitment	 is	 a	 marriage	 contract	 or	 a	 prenuptial
agreement.	These	agreements	make	interesting	reading.	The	first	paragraph	of	one	of	these
--- Page 216 ---
contracts	states,	“The	two	parties,	being	very	much	in	love	and	planning	to	live	together
happily	for	all	the	days	of	their	life,	are	hereby	entering	into	this	agreement.”
The	rest	of	the	prenuptial	agreement	details	at	great	length	how	the	property	will	be
split	when	they	separate.	They	are,	in	effect,	planning	the	details	of	the	separation	even
before	they	get	into	the	marriage.
When	one	party	is	not	willing	to	commit	totally	to	the	relationship,	this	holding	back
triggers	feelings	of	rejection	and	unworthiness	in	the	other.	It	makes	one	person	feel	that
he	or	she	is	not	good	enough.	He	or	she	feels	that	this	is	the	reason	the	other	is	not	willing
to	commit	totally	and	unequivocally	to	him	or	her.
When	Barbara	and	I	got	married,	the	minister	showed	us	the	various	marriage	vows
that	we	could	take.	We	could	choose	our	own	wording	for	the	ceremony.	As	we	went
through	the	various	vows,	I	asked	him,	“Where	are	the	words,	’Till	death	do	us	part’?”
The	minister,	a	very	fine	man,	explained	that	those	words	had	been	deleted	from	most
marriage	ceremonies	today.	Most	young	people	did	not	want	to	have	something	so	clear
and	unequivocal	put	into	their	marriage	vows.	They	wanted	something	that	allowed	them
more	flexibility	and	more	options.
I	asked	him	if	we	could	put	it	back	in.	He	said	that	we	could	do	whatever	we	liked.	So	I
insisted	that	the	words	“Till	death	do	us	part”	be	part	of	our	marriage	ceremony.	I	felt	that
a	wishy-washy	marriage	vow	such	as	one	he	showed	us,	“As	long	as	we	both	shall	
love,”
was	the	sort	of	marriage	vow	that	suggested	that	they	were	probably	not	really	serious
about	the	long-term	survival	of	their	marriage.
The	way	to	overcome	a	lack	of	commitment	is	to	commit	yourself	completely	to	the
relationship.	Get	into	it	with	both	feet.	Never	consider	the	possibility	of	the	relationship
failing.	If,	through	no	fault	of	your	own,	the	relationship	does	not	work	out,	at	least	it	will
not	be	because	you	were	half-hearted	about	it.
The	 second	 major	 problem	 in	 relationships	 is	
trying	 to	 change	 the	 other	 person
	 or
expecting	the	other	person	to	change.	This	is	another	subtle	form	of	rejection.	It	is	another
way	of	saying,	“You	are	not	good	enough	for	me	the	way	you	are.”
Whenever	you	try	to	change	another	person	you	imply	that	he	or	she	is	unworthy,	and
you	ignite	feelings	of	anger	and	resentment.
The	fact	is	that	people	do	not	change	very	much.	As	the	comedian	Flip	Wilson	said,
“What	you	
sees
	is	what	you	
gets.”
	If	the	person	you	are	considering	marrying	is	not	what
you	want	to	
get
,	the	time	to	do	something	about	it	is	before	you	get	married,	not	afterward.
The	solution	to	the	problem	of	trying	to	change	the	other,	of	trying	to	get	the	other
person	to	lose	weight,	quit	smoking,	exercise,	become	more	positive	or	anything	else,	is	to
simply	accept	the	person	as	he	or	she	is.	If	you	cannot	accept	the	behavior	and	the
personality	of	the	other	person,	that	should	tell	you	something.	Acceptance	is	largely
determined	by	compatibility.	Acceptance	is	a	good	indicator	of	whether	this	is	the	right
relationship	for	you.	Nonacceptance	before	the	marriage	is	vastly	superior	to	having	to
deal	with	it	afterward.
Sometimes,	when	you	stop	trying	to	change	the	other	person	and	just	accept	him	or	her
--- Page 217 ---
unconditionally,	he	or	she	will	begin	to	change	as	a	result	of	his	or	her	own	choice.	Human
beings	can	be	perverse.	Often	they	will	persist	in	behavior	that	irritates	you	just	because
you	are	continually	trying	to	get	them	to	change.	When	you	stop	trying	to	change	them,
they	will	often	change	their	behavior	voluntarily.
The	third	major	problem	in	relationships	is	
jealousy
.	Jealousy	is	always	experienced	in
the	mind	and	heart	of	the	person	feeling	the	emotion.	Shakespeare	called	jealousy	the
“green-eyed	monster.”	It	
is	a	terrible	negative	emotion	that	arises	from	feelings	of	low
self-esteem	and	personal	inadequacy.
The	person	who	feels	jealous	has	doubts	about	his	or	her	value	as	a	person.	He	or	she
feels,	“Nobody	could	ever	really	love	me,	being	the	kind	of	person	I	am.”
This	type	of	individual	probably	suffered	from	destructive	criticism	in	childhood	and
negative	experiences	with	the	opposite	sex	as	an	adult.	If	a	person	never	received	the
unconditional	 love	 of	 his	 or	 her	 parents	 or,	 even	 worse,	 if	 the	 parents	 rejected	 or
disapproved	of	the	child	during	the	time	he	or	she	was	growing	up,	when	that	person
becomes	an	adult	he	or	she	will	be	very	vulnerable	to	not	being	fully	loved	and	accepted
by	others.
The	antidote	to	jealousy	is	to	realize	that	it	has	nothing	to	do	with	the	other	person.	It
has	to	do	only	with	the	low	self-esteem	of	the	person	suffering	from	it.	The	way	to	get
over	jealousy	is	by	working	on	self-esteem,	by	saying	over	and	over,	“I	like	myself,	I	like
myself,	I	like	myself.”
When	your	self-esteem	is	high	enough,	when	you	like	and	respect	yourself	sufficiently,
nothing	that	anyone	else	does	or	does	not	do	will	make	you	doubt	your	own	personal
value.	You	will	be	emotionally	self-reliant,	independent	of	the	behavior	of	others	for	how
you	feel	about	yourself.
It	is	never	a	smart	or	clever	thing	to	
deliberately
	make	another	person	jealous.	Jealousy
is	a	painful,	destructive	emotion,	and	it	is	not	the	sort	of	thing	that	one	friend	inflicts	on
another.	Each	of	us	needs	to	feel	safe	and	secure	in	the	relationship	to	which	we	give
ourselves,	and	the	deliberate	provocation	of	jealousy	shakes	our	security.	Jealousy	makes
us	feel	miserable	and	unhappy.
The	fourth	major	problem	in	relationships	is	
self-pity
.	This	occurs	when	you	feel	sorry	for
yourself	for	something	that	your	partner	has	either	done	or	not	done	to	you	or	for	you.
Usually	people	who	feel	self-pity	learned	it	from	one	of	their	parents	who	practiced	self-
pity	as	a	method	of	interaction	at	home.
Often	people	indulge	in	self-pity—“Woe	is	me!”—when	their	partners	are	so	busy	or
happy	with	work	that	they	feel	left	out.	The	solution	to	self-pity	is	
not
	to	get	your	partner
to	do	or	stop	doing	something.	The	antidote	is	to	get	so	busy	with	your	own	goals	that	you
don’t	have	time	to	feel	sorry	for	yourself.
You	are	responsible	for	your	own	emotions.	You	are	the	cause	
of	your	own	happiness
or	unhappiness.	Nobody	makes	you	feel	anything.	If	you	experience	self-pity,	it	is	because
you	
choose
	to	feel	sorry	for	yourself.	And	you	can	choose	another	reaction	if	you	want	to.
The	basis	of	self-pity	is	the	mistaken	notion	that	someone	else	is	responsible	for	making
you	happy.
--- Page 218 ---
Self-pity	 is	 a	 form	 of	 weakness	 and	 insincerity	 that	 stops	 you	 from	 becoming	 a
completely	fulfilled	human	being.	If	you	are	in	a	relationship	in	which	the	other	person	is
feeling	sorry	for	himself	or	herself,	be	as	compassionate	and	as	understanding	as	possible
and	then	encourage	him	or	her	to	get	busy	doing	something	that	he	or	she	enjoys.
The	fifth	major	problem	in	relationships	is	
negative	expectations
.	These	occur	when	you
constantly	expect	the	other	person	to	do	something	to	disappoint	you.	The	fact	is	that	your
expectations	tend	to	be	fulfilled.	If	you	expect	good	things	to	happen,	you	will	seldom	be
disappointed.	If	you	expect	your	partner	to	let	you	down,	you	will	seldom	be	disappointed
in	that	either.
The	rule	is	to	always	
expect	the	best
	of	your	partner.	Perhaps	the	most	wonderful	words
that	one	person	can	say	to	another	are,	“I	love	you,	and	I	believe	in	you.”	Always	tell	him
or	her	that	you	have	complete	confidence	and	faith	in	his	or	her	ability	to	do	anything	that
he	or	she	puts	his	or	her	mind	to.
It	feels	wonderful	to	go	off	to	work	in	the	morning	knowing	that	the	most	important
person	in	your	life	believes	in	you	completely.	And	it	is	wonderful	to	come	home	at	night
to	 a	 person	 who	 has	 complete	 faith	 in	 your	 ability	 to	 succeed,	 no	 matter	 what	 the
obstacles.	Many	of	the	most	successful	men	and	women	who	have	ever	lived	owe	their
success	to	the	unshakable	positive	expectations	of	their	mate.
The	sixth	major	problem	in	relationships	is	
incompatibility
.	Incompatibility	is	a	very
sensitive	subject,	which	many	people	do	not	even	like	to	discuss.	However,	it	is	one	of	the
most	common	problems	that	arise	in	relationships,	and	perhaps	the	most	common	reason
why	people	are	unhappy	in	their	marriages.
Usually,	when	two	people	meet	and	fall	in	love,	they	are	attracted	to	each	other	by
things	they	have	in	common.	However,	as	the	years	pass	and	they	change,	they	often	grow
in	different	directions.	
They	develop	new	interests,	new	tastes	and	new	opinions.	What
was	important	to	them	when	they	first	met	no	longer	means	as	much,	and	it	loses	its	power
to	bond	the	two	together.
The	most	common	time	for	incompatibility	to	occur	in	marriages	seems	to	be	between
the	ages	of	twenty-eight	and	thirty-two	years.	During	their	twenties,	people	grow	and
change	at	the	most	rapid	rate	of	their	adult	lives.	If	a	couple	gets	married	during	their	early
twenties,	by	the	end	of	their	twenties	they	may	find	that	they	have	very	little	in	common.
They	may	find	that	they	have	become	incompatible.
THE	WARNING	SIGNS
The	first	sign	that	a	couple	is	no	longer	compatible	is	that	the	laughter	goes	out	of	their
relationship.	They	don’t	joke	together	or	find	a	lot	of	funny	things	in	common.
The	second	sign	is	that	the	conversation	dries	up.	They	seem	to	have	little	to	talk	about.
The	home	becomes	a	functional	place	where	the	couple	just	happens	to	live,	rather	than	a
place	of	shared	warmth	and	harmony.
Each	person	preoccupies	himself	or	herself	with	work	or	the	children	or	something
else.	Each	goes	through	the	motions.	Each	puts	on	a	good	front	for	their	neighbors	and
--- Page 219 ---
friends.
Many	people	who	are	unhappy	in	their	marriages	plunge	into	their	work,	working
twelve	and	fourteen	hours	a	day,	so	they	do	not	have	to	go	home.	And	the	less	time	they
spend	with	the	other,	the	worse	the	relationship	becomes.	They	have	less	and	less	in
common.
If	you	find	that	the	laughter	and	conversation	are	going	out	of	your	relationship,	it’s
time	to	take	action.	If	you	feel	that	you	and	the	other	person	have	very	little	left	in
common,	you	should	make	every	effort	to	rebuild	the	relationship.	You	should	recognize
that	you	have	a	serious,	life-disrupting	problem	and	sit	down	together	and	discuss	it.	You
should	make	every	effort	to	recreate	what	you	once	had.
Perhaps	you	need	to	take	some	time	off	and	go	on	a	trip.	Perhaps	you	need	to	start
taking	an	interest	in	each	other’s	activities,	or	to	develop	new	common	interests.	If	you
have	invested	several	years	and	a	good	deal	of	emotion	in	building	your	relationship,	
and
especially	if	there	are	children,	you	must	do	everything	possible	to	save	the	situation.
HOW	TO	PUT	THE	LOVE	BACK	IN
One	of	the	most	powerful	ways	to	put	love	back	into	a	relationship	is	to	realize	that	love
is	a	verb:	
Love
	is	an	action	word.	“To	love”	requires	that	you	do	the	things	that	a	loving
person	would	do	if	you	wish	to	feel	the	emotion	that	a	person	in	love	would	feel.	You	may
be	able	to	
act	your	way
	back	into	loving	the	person	you	have	fallen	out	of	love	with.
You	learn	to	love	another	person	by	doing	loving	things	with	and	for	that	person.	Small
attentions,	little	favors,	kindnesses,	gifts	and	other	things	that	make	the	other	person	happy
actually	make	you	love	the	person	more.	When	you	stop	doing	these	little	things,	you	can
begin	to	fall	out	of	love.	The	emotional	ties	begin	to	unwind.	The	fires	begin	to	die	down.
The	Greek	word	for	this	process	of	rekindling	love	through	action	is	called	
Praxis
.	The
Principle	of	Praxis	states	that	you	generate	emotions	in	yourself	by	doing	things	consistent
with	those	emotions	over	and	over	until	they	kindle	into	flames.	You	act	your	way	into
feeling,	very	much	as	we	discussed	in	
Chapter	Three
,	The	Master	Program.
You	can	put	the	love	back	into	your	relationship	by	once	more	doing	the	things	that	you
did	during	courtship.	You	can	start	to	be	more	caring,	more	attentive,	more	understanding
and	more	sympathetic.	As	you	
act	the	part
	of	a	loving	spouse,	you	may	find	your	feelings
toward	the	other	person	beginning	to	change	for	the	better.	You	can	act	your	way	back	into
love.
By	thinking	loving	thoughts	about	the	other	and	by	talking	to	the	other	in	a	loving	and
courteous	way,	you	can	often	rekindle	the	feelings	that	once	brought	you	together.	Look
into	the	other	person	for	the	good	qualities	you	once	admired.	Forgive	and	forget	mistakes
that	the	other	person	may	have	made.	More	than	anything,	acting	your	way	back	into	love
requires	that	you	really	want	to	stay	with	this	person,	that	you	really	want	to	rebuild	and
preserve	this	relationship.
WHAT	DO	YOU	DO	IF	IT	CAN’T	BE	SAVED?
--- Page 220 ---
It	may	happen,	as	it	often	does,	that	the	fire	has	gone	out	of	your	relationship	completely.
There	is	no	longer	any	desire	to	make	the	emotional	sacrifices	that	are	necessary	to	save
the	relationship.	The	two	parties	have,	in	effect,	become	incompatible.
Incompatibility	is	the	most	common	reason	for	the	breakdown	of	any	relationship.	The
average	adult	goes	out	with	many	members	of	the	opposite	sex	to	find	even	
one
	with
whom	he	or	she	is	compatible.	Why	should	it	be	so	surprising	that	two	people	would
evolve	and	develop	into	two	dissimilar	people?	Why	should	it	be	so	surprising	that	two
people	become	incompatible?
Often	you	see	couples	sitting	in	restaurants	eating	quietly	and	not	talking	to	each	other.
Or	 you	 will	 see	 people	 driving	 along	 together	 staring	 out	 into	 the	 traffic	 without
conversing.	These	are	indications	that	the	couple	has	become	incompatible.
BEGIN	WITH	ACCEPTANCE
The	best	thing	to	do	when	two	people	have	become	incompatible	is	simply	to	accept	it.
William	James	of	Harvard	said,	“The	first	step	in	dealing	with	any	difficulty	is	to	be
willing	to	have	it	so.”
Much	unhappiness	and	psychosomatic	illness	is	caused	by	
denial
,	refusing	to	face	the
fact	that	something	is	wrong	in	your	relationship.	Denial,	or	internal	resistance,	causes
stress	and	tension.	The	unwillingness	to	deal	with	something	so	embarrassing	and	so
threatening	 to	 one’s	 self-esteem	 as	 a	 failed	 relationship	 is	 a	 major	 cause	 of	 illness,
insomnia,	headaches	and	expressions	of	negative	emotion	such	as	irritability,	anger	and
depression.	These	are	all	symptoms	of	an	underlying	cause,	which	may	be	incompatibility
in	the	relationship.
One	of	the	most	useful	ways	to	deal	with	any	difficulty	in	life	is	to	ask	yourself,	“Is	this
a	fact,	or	is	this	a	problem?”	If	it’s	a	
problem
,	it	is	amenable	to	a	solution.	There	is
something	you	can	do	about	it,	and	you	can	apply	your	intelligence	to	finding	a	way	to
resolve	it.
However,	if	it	is	a	
fact
,	the	smartest	thing	to	do	is	to	accept	it.	Facts	are	like	the
weather:	There	is	nothing	that	you	can	do	about	them	except	to	incorporate	them	into	your
world	 view	 and	 make	
provision	 for	 them.	 Many	 people	 cause	 themselves	 enormous
amounts	of	unnecessary	unhappiness	by	confusing	the	
fact
	of	incompatibility	with	the
problem
	of	incompatibility.	When	the	fire	goes	out	of	a	relationship,	when	the	ashes	go
cold	and	incompatibility	sets	in,	it	is	time	for	one	or	both	parties	to	face	the	fact	squarely
and	honestly	and	then	do	something	about	it.
The	reason	you	enter	into	a	relationship	with	another	person	is	so	that	you	can	be
happier
	inside	the	relationship	than	you	would	be	outside	of	it.	Many	people	enter	into
relationships	in	order	to	be	happier	and	more	fulfilled,	and	they	instead	find	themselves
unhappy	and	less	fulfilled.	Then	they	mistakenly	cling	to	the	relationship,	forgetting	the
reason	for	entering	it	in	the	first	place.
The	reason	that	you	choose	to	be	with	another	person	rather	than	to	be	alone	is	to	make
your	life	 better,	 richer	 and	 more	 enjoyable.	 It	 is	 not	 to	 suffer	 and	 be	 miserable.	 An
unhappy	relationship	robs	you	of	your	happiness	and	undermines	your	potential	more
--- Page 221 ---
surely	than	any	other	single	factor.
Many	people	stay	in	bad	relationships	because	they	are	afraid	of	
what	others	might	say
.
They	are	afraid	of	losing	face	with	their	parents,	their	friends	and	the	people	they	work
with.	They	force	themselves	to	keep	up	appearances	for	the	public	while,	behind	closed
doors,	they	are	bitterly	unhappy.	They	often	feel	trapped	in	a	relationship	that	they	cannot
get	out	of	without	suffering	intense	embarrassment	with	the	people	they	know.
The	fact	is	that	
no	one	else	really	cares
	about	your	relationship	as	much	as	you	do.	In
most	cases,	you	will	find	that	the	people	you	thought	would	be	the	most	distressed	to	learn
of	 your	 failed	 marriage	 are	 not	 really	 concerned	 at	 all.	 Most	 people	 have	 so	 many
problems	of	their	own	that	they	have	very	little	time	or	energy	to	think	about	you	and	your
problems.	In	fact	most	people	spend	the	majority	of	their	time,	all	day	long,	thinking	about
themselves.	Even	if	you	are	very	close	to	another	person—a	son,	a	daughter	or	a	best
friend—that	other	person	really	spends	very	little	time	thinking	about	you	in	the	course	of
the	day.
Your	whole	life	could	be	falling	apart,	but	to	most	other	people,	what	they	are	going	to
have	for	lunch	today	is	more	important	to	them	than	your	problems.	Many	people	find	that
when	they	finally	decide	to	leave	an	unhappy	relationship,	their	decision	has	virtually	
no
effect	at	all
	on	the	people	around	them.	Others	simply	do	not	care.	They	may	express	a
little	sympathy	and	ask	a	few	questions,	
mostly	out	of	curiosity,	but	then	they	have	to	get
home	for	dinner	and	get	on	with	the	rest	of	their	lives,	leaving	you	alone.
LET	IT	GO
The	bottom	line,	based	on	my	seminars	and	workshops	with	thousands	of	individuals	and
couples,	is	that	the	most	foolish	thing	you	can	do	is	to	stay	in	a	bad	relationship	because
you	think	that	somehow	it	is	going	to	hurt	or	upset	someone	else	if	you	leave	it.
The	smartest	thing	you	can	do	is	to	be	perfectly	selfish	emotionally.	If	you	are	not
happy	and	you	cannot	save	the	situation,	then	at	least	please	yourself.	Do	what	makes	
you
happy.	You	can	never	make	anyone	else	happy	by	being	miserable	yourself.	Only	happy
people	can	make	others	happy.	Never	sacrifice	yourself	on	the	altar	of	someone	else’s
happiness.	You	end	up	achieving	neither	your	own	happiness	nor	the	happiness	of	the
other	person.
LOVE	IS	THE	MOST	IMPORTANT	THING
The	most	important	thing	in	life	is	love.	The	security	and	joy	of	a	loving	relationship	is
perhaps	the	most	wonderful	thing	that	a	man	and	woman	can	experience.
You	should	do	everything	possible	to	build	and	maintain	a	loving	relationship	with
another	person,	including	listening,	expressing	gratitude	and	appreciation,	treating	the
other	person	with	kindness,	courtesy,	gentleness,	patience	and	especially	compassion.	You
should	 make	 every	 effort	 to	 build	 a	 loving	 relationship	 within	 which	 you	 can	 live
indefinitely.
But	if	it	doesn’t	work	out,	have	the	courage	and	character	to	accept	that	nothing	in
--- Page 222 ---
human	life	is	either	perfect	or	permanent.	Have	the	honesty	to	accept	that	the	kindest	thing
that	you	can	do	for	someone	else	is	to	achieve	your	own	happiness.	If	you	face	life	as	it	is,
and	not	as	you	wish	it	would	be,	you	will	be	true	to	yourself	and	true	to	the	most
important	people	in	your	life.
ACTION	EXERCISE
Since	 happy	 relationships	 are	 central	 to	 your	 self-esteem	 and	 happiness,	 make	 the
decision	to	get	your	primary	relationship	in	order.	Resolve	to	sit	down	with	the	other
person	and	ask	him	or	her,	
“What	can	we	do	more	of,	or	less	of,	to	make	this	a	wonderful
relationship?”
Change	your	order	of	priorities,	of	values,	if	necessary	and	make	your	relationship
more	important	than	anything	else.	Be	willing	to	make	sacrifices,	changes,	if	necessary	to
ensure	the	quality	and	stability	of	your	home	and	the	emotional	health	of	the	person	you
care	about	more	than	anyone	else.
A	solid,	supportive,	totally	loving	relationship	serves	as	the	foundation	upon	which	you
can	build	a	wonderful	life.	It	is	the	true	manifestation	of	the	excellent	person	you	are
becoming.	It	is	your	key	to	health	and	happiness.	Your	relationship	is	a	reflection	of	the
person	you	really	are	and	your	assurance	of	a	great	future.