
--- Page 223 ---
CHAPTER	11
Mastering	the	Art	of	Parenting
The	most	important	and	enduring	relationship	that	you	ever	enter	into	begins	when	you
bring	a	child	into	the	world.	Income,	jobs,	friendships,	health	and	even	marriages	may
come	and	go,	but	your	role	as	a	parent	lasts	as	long	as	you	live.	The	impact	of	your
parenting	can	affect	your	child	and	your	children’s	children	for	generations.	Parenting	is
probably	the	most	profound	responsibility	an	adult	can	ever	take	on.
No	one	is	born	with	the	skills	of	successful	parenting.	We	all	begin	as	amateurs.
Fortunately,	you	can	learn	a	lot	about	how	to	be	a	good	and	effective	parent	by	reading
and	seeking	advice	from	friends,	relatives,	doctors	and	experts	in	the	field.	There	are	many
fine	 books,	 magazines	 and	 articles	 containing	 advice	 and	 insights	 that	 can	 help	 you
tremendously	in	being	the	kind	of	parent	that	you	want	to	be.
WHAT	IS	THE	TRUE	ROLE	OF	PARENTING?
The	most	important	single	role	of	parenting	is	to	love	and	nurture	your	children	and	to
build	in	them	feelings	of	high	self-esteem	and	self-confidence.	If	you	raise	your	children
feeling	terrific	about	themselves,	if	you	bring	them	up	full	of	eagerness	to	go	out	and	take
on	the	world,	then	you	have	fulfilled	your	responsibility	in	the	highest	possible	sense.
Conversely,	if	you	give	your	child	everything	of	a	material	nature	but	raise	him	or	her
lacking	in	self-confidence	and	self-esteem,	you	have	failed	in	your	primary	role.
The	average	adult	probably	spends	fifty	years	of	his	or	her	life	getting	over	the	first
five.	Abraham	Maslow	taught	that	we	have	two	main	types	of	needs	that	we	strive	to
fulfill.	These	are	the	needs	to	fulfill	our	potential,	our	“being”	needs,	and	the	needs	to
compensate	for	our	perceived	deficiencies.	The	child	raised	without	sufficient	love	tends
to	seek	it	all	his	or	her	life,	rather	than	striving	to	realize	his	or	her	potential.	Perhaps	the
kindest	thing	a	parent	can	do	is	to	give	his	or	her	child	the	love	and	emotional	support	the
child	needs	to	grow	and	thrive,	creating	a	climate	in	which	the	child	feels	totally	loved	by
the	most	important	people	in	his	or	her	life.
The	growing	child	develops	a	healthy	personality	in	direct	proportion	to	the	quality	and
quantity	of	love	he	or	she	receives.	Just	as	a	plant	needs	sunshine	and	rain,	a	child	needs
love	and	nurturing.
Parents	want	the	very	best	for	their	children.	They	want	to	raise	their	children	to	be
happy	and	healthy.	Why	is	it	then	that	so	many	children	grow	up	feeling	insufficiently
loved?	Why	is	it	that	parents	somehow	deprive	their	children	of	the	love	they	require	for
healthy	growth?
--- Page 224 ---
WHY	PARENTS	DON’T	LOVE	ENOUGH
There	are	two	major	reasons	for	the	failure	by	parents	to	love	their	children	enough.	First,
the	parents	do	not	love	themselves.	Parents	with	low	self-esteem	have	great	difficulty
giving	more	love	to	their	children	than	they	feel	for	themselves.
The	second	reason	that	parents	don’t	love	their	children	enough	is	they	often	have	the
mistaken	notion	that	their	children	exist	to	fulfill	their	expectations.	A	major	cause	of
friction	between	parents	and	children	is	the	parents’	feeling	or	perception	that	the	children
are	failing	to	“measure	up”	to	what	the	parents	expect	them	to	be	or	do.
Many	parents	look	upon	their	children	as	chattel,	as	a	form	of	property.	They	feel	their
children	are	behaving	properly	only	when	they	are	doing	and	saying	what	their	parents
want	them	to.	If	the	child’s	behavior	differs	from	the	parents’	expectations,	the	mother	or
father	responds	with	criticism.	Without	planning	to,	they	withdraw	their	love	and	approval
from	the	child.	They	step	on	their	child’s	emotional	lifeline.	The	child	feels	unloved	and
the	foundation	is	laid	for	personality	problems	later	in	life.	All	negative	or	
antisocial
behavior	is	a	cry	for	help,	an	attempt	to	escape	the	feelings	of	guilt,	anger	and	resentment
that	begin	with	criticism	early	in	life.
CHILDREN	ARE	NOT	PROPERTY
The	starting	point	of	raising	
super	kids
	is	to	realize	that	your	children	are	not	your
property.	Your	children	belong	to	themselves.	They	are	a	gift	to	you	from	high	above,	and
a	temporary	gift	at	that.
I	tell	my	children	that	they	have	been	sent	to	me	by	God,	and	that	my	job	is	to	love
them	and	take	care	of	them	until	they	grow	up.	I	treat	them	as	if	they	are	precious	gifts
loaned	 to	 me	 for	 only	 a	 short	 time.	 My	 job	 is	 not	 to	 make	 them	 conform	 to	 my
expectations,	but	to	encourage	them	to	develop	their	own	uniqueness	and	individuality.
Each	child	is	unlike	any	other	and	comes	into	this	world	with	his	or	her	own	agenda,
with	his	or	her	own	special	talents,	interests	and	abilities.	What	your	child	can	and	will
become,	no	one	can	possibly	know	until	much	later.	The	child’s	job	is	not	to	conform	to
his	or	her	parents’	expectations,	but	to	grow	and	flower	and	become	everything	he	or	she
is	capable	of	becoming.
Kahlil	Gibran,	in	his	wonderful	book	
The	Prophet
,	expresses	this	idea	beautifully.	He
says,	“
Your	children	are	not	your	children.	They	are	the	sons	and	daughters	of	life’s
longing	for	itself.	They	come	through	you	but	not	from	you,	and	though	they	are	with	you,
yet	they	belong	not	to	you
.
“You	may	give	them	your	love	but	not	your	thoughts,	for	they	have	their	own	thoughts.
You	may	house	their	bodies	but	not	their	souls,	for	their	souls	dwell	in	the	House	of
Tomorrow,	which	you	cannot	visit,	not	even	in	your	dreams.	You	may	strive	to	be	like	them,
but	seek	not	to	make	them	like	you.	For	life	goes	not	backward	nor	tarries	with	yesterday.
You	are	the	bows	from	which	your	children,	as	living	arrows,	are	sent	forth.”
--- Page 225 ---
CHILDREN	ARE	A	PRECIOUS	GIFT
When	you	look	at	your	children	as	precious	gifts	that	you	can	only	enjoy	for	a	short	time,
you	see	your	role	as	a	parent	differently.	When	you	celebrate	and	encourage	the	special
nature	and	personality	of	your	child,	he	or	she	grows	like	a	flower	in	the	sunshine.	But	
if
you	try	to	get	your	child	to	be	something	he	or	she	is	not,	your	child’s	spirit	will	wither,
and	his	or	her	potential	for	happiness	and	joy	will	shrivel	like	a	leaf	on	a	tree	in	autumn.
The	Law	of	Correspondence	states	that	your	outer	world	of	relationships	will	mirror
your	inner	world	of	thought,	and	your	true	personality.	What	your	children	are	and	what
they	become	will	be	very	much	a	reflection	of	who	you	are	as	a	person.	Whenever	you
have	a	problem	with	your	child,	look	into	yourself	and	ask,	“What	is	there	in	me	that
could	be	causing	this	situation?”
Most	parents	blame	and	criticize	their	children	when	their	children	do	something	that
the	parent	doesn’t	like.	However,	superior	parents	look	to	themselves	as	the	primary
source	of	the	child’s	behavior.	They	realize	that	the	apple	never	falls	far	from	the	tree.
In	their	earlier	years,	children	are	almost	totally	reactive.	Their	behavior,	good	or	bad,
is	very	much	a	reaction	to	the	way	they	are	treated	by	their	parents	and	the	people	around
them.	 When	 the	 parent	 begins	 to	 accept	 responsibility	 for	 the	 child’s	 behavior,	 real
progress	becomes	possible	in	solving	difficulties	the	child	might	be	having.
LOVE	MAKES	THE	DIFFERENCE
The	most	important	consideration	in	raising	super	kids	is	the	amount	of	love	they	receive.
Children	need	love	like	flowers	need	water.	You	can	never	give	a	child	too	much	love.	A
continuous	flow	of	love	and	approval	from	the	parent	to	the	child	is	the	child’s	lifeline	to
emotional	and	physical	health.	Almost	all	problems	with	children	can	be	traced	to	the
child’s	perception	that	he	or	she	was	not	fully	loved	and	accepted	by	one	or	both	parents.
Lack	of	love,	real	or	imagined,	has	serious	consequences.	Love	deprivation	can	lead	to
physical	or	emotional	illness,	and	even	death.	The	damage	caused	by	love	withheld	or
curtailed	can	have	a	long-term,	destructive	effect	on	the	personality	of	the	child.	Adults
with	emotional	problems	were	invariably	children	whose	parents	didn’t	love	them	enough.
In	the	early	part	of	this	century,	there	was	a	theory	of	child-raising	that	held	that	the
less	contact	a	child	had	with	adults	in	its	early	months,	the	healthier	the	child	would	be.	It
was	felt	that	exposure	to	too	many	adults	would	expose	the	child	to	various	infections.
Based	on	this	theory,	access	to	newborn	children	was	severely	restricted.	Infants	were
touched	 as	 little	 as	 possible.	 Parents’	 visits	 were	 restricted.	 Aside	 from	 having	 their
diapers	changed	and	being	given	bottles,	the	children	were	left	alone	in	their	cribs	as	much
as	possible.	But	a	terrible	thing	began	to	happen.	Children	being	cared	for	in	nurseries
where	they	received	very	little	contact	refused	nourishment.	They	became	passive.	They
soon	started	to	shrivel	and	some	of	them	died.
This	malady,	“miasma,”	was	also	called	the	“failure	to	thrive”	syndrome.
These	children,	deprived	of	love	and	touching	in	the	first	weeks	and	months	after	birth,
--- Page 226 ---
actually	lost	all	desire	to	live.	They	began	to	die	at	an	alarming	rate.
In	one	orphanage	in	New	York	State,	forty-eight	out	of	fifty	babies	died	in	a	six-month
period.	 Finally,	 the	 doctors	 and	 nurses	 realized	 that	 the	 children	 needed	 warmth	 and
contact	with	an	adult.	When	the	nurses	began	holding	the	children,	the	“miasma”	began	to
clear	up	and	the	children	began	to	grow	normally.
In	a	famous	case	reported	in	one	of	the	psychological	journals,	a	young	boy,	three	years
old,	was	left	with	a	baby-sitter	while	his	parents	went	out	for	dinner.	Tragically,	the
parents	were	both	killed	in	an	automobile	accident	on	the	way	home	from	the	restaurant.
The	next	thing	the	little	boy	knew,	he	was	taken	out	of	his	home	by	the	Social	Services
Department	and	put	into	a	foster	home.	He	never	saw	his	loving	parents	again,	and	he	was
too	young	to	understand	what	had	happened.
He	began	to	act	up	in	the	foster	home.	He	wet	the	bed,	he	cried,	he	got	into	fights	with
other	children	and	became	a	serious	behavior	problem.	As	a	result,	he	was	moved	from
foster	home	to	foster	home.	And	a	remarkable	thing	happened.	He	stopped	growing.	For
the	next	four	years	he	had	problems	in	home	after	home,	and	at	the	age	of	seven,	he	was
still	the	same	physical	size	that	he	had	been	at	the	age	of	three.
Then	something	wonderful	happened.	A	loving	couple	met	the	boy	in	a	foster	home
and	applied	to	adopt	him.	They	took	him	home	and	began	to	shower	him	with	warmth	and
affection.	They	held	him,	talked	to	him,	took	him	for	walks	and	drowned	him	with	love
and	unconditional	acceptance.	They	hugged	him	and	kissed	him	and	held	his	hand.
Within	a	few	weeks,	the	little	boy	started	to	grow	again.	In	the	
next	nine	months,	he
grew	a	full	four	years’	worth	of	height	and	weight	and	by	the	end	of	the	first	year	with	his
new	parents,	he	had	reached	the	normal	height	and	weight	for	his	age.	The	powerful	effect
of	love	on	children	is	amazing!
There	are	many	examples	of	children	who	failed	to	thrive	and	grow	physically	as	the
result	of	love	withheld.	There	are	even	more	examples	of	children	who	fail	to	grow
emotionally	and	mentally	as	the	result	of	the	love	they	needed	for	healthy	growth	being
reduced	or	cut	off	when	they	were	growing	up.
These	 mental	 and	 emotional	 problems	 are	 manifested	 in	 behavioral	 disturbances,
personality	disorders,	neurosis,	psychosis	and	serious	failures	to	cope	as	adults.	Love
deprivation	is	surely	the	most	serious	problem	that	a	child	can	suffer	during	his	or	her
formative	years.
UNCONDITIONAL	LOVE	AND	ACCEPTANCE
The	key	to	raising	super	kids	is	to	give	them	an	unbroken	flow	of	unconditional	love	and
acceptance.	Make	it	clear	to	your	child	that	nothing	he	or	she	does	could	ever	cause	you
to	love	him	or	her	less	than	100	percent.	The	most	wonderful	gift	you	can	give	your	child
is	the	absolute	conviction	that	you	love	him	or	her	completely,	without	reservation,	no
matter	what	he	or	she	does	and	no	matter	what	happens.
Whenever	I	have	to	discipline	or	correct	one	of	my	children,	I	always	start	by	saying,	“I
love	you	very	much,	but	you	can’t	do	this,	or	you	have	to	stop	behaving	like	that.”	I
--- Page 227 ---
always	make	it	very	clear	that	I	am	unhappy	with	the	behavior,	not	with	the	child.	I	have
trained
	my	children	so	that	they	understand	this	completely.
I	used	to	say	to	my	little	girl,	Christina,	“How	much	does	Daddy	love	you?”	And	she
would	stretch	her	hands	out	wide	and	say,	“You	love	me	
this
	much.”	I	would	then	say,
“What	about	when	I	send	you	to	your	bedroom?”	She	would	reply,	“You	still	love	me	
this
much,”	with	her	arms	open	wide.
Then	I	would	ask,	“What	about	when	I	spank	your	hand	or	take	away	your	toys	and
send	you	to	your	bedroom?”
She	 would	 then	 say,	 “’Daddy,	 you	 still	 love	 me	
this
	 much,”	 with	 her	 hands
outstretched.
I	would	then	ask	her,	with	mock	surprise,	“How	can	this	be?”	
She	would	reply,	“Daddy,
no	matter	what	I	do,	you	
always
	love	me	100	percent.”
Dr.	Ross	Campbell,	in	his	book	
How	to	Really	Love	Your	Child
,	says	that	your	child	is
always	asking	you,	one	way	or	another,	“Do	you	love	me?”	The	only	variable	is	how	you
answer.
Sometimes	the	child	misbehaves	as	a	way	of	checking	on	whether	you	really	love	him
or	her.	The	older	and	more	mature	children	become,	the	more	subtle	they	are	about	how
they	ask	the	question,	“Do	you	love	me?”	However,	the	question	is	always	the	same.	The
excellent	parent	is	one	who	always	answers	this	question	by	telling	the	child,	in	every	way
possible,	“Yes,	I	really	love	you.”
HOW	TO	LET	THEM	KNOW
If	you	want	to	raise	super	kids,	
tell	them	that	you	love	them	every	single	day
.	You	can
never	say	“I	love	you”	to	a	child	too	often.	Even	if	your	child	pretends	that	he	or	she
doesn’t	need	to	hear	it,	don’t	you	believe	it.	Every	time	a	child	hears	the	words	“I	love
you”	from	his	or	her	parents,	the	child	feels	more	secure	and	confident.	His	or	her	self-
esteem	increases.	And	the	more	they	know	you	love	them,	the	freer	they	are	to	love
themselves.
There	are	three	main	ways	for	you	to	
tell
	your	children	you	love	them	regularly.	First,
tell	your	children	that	you	love	them	with	
eye	contact
.	Children	have	“emotional	tanks,”
and	they	fill	their	“emotional	tanks”	by	drinking	in	love	from	their	parents	through	their
eyes.	Whenever	you	look	at	a	child	with	loving	eye	contact,	you	make	the	child	feel
wonderful	about	himself	or	herself.	From	as	early	as	six	weeks	of	age,	children	are
fascinated	by	looking	into	the	eyes	of	someone	who	is	smiling	at	them	with	warmth,	love
and	affection.
Children	who	do	not	receive	loving	eye	contact	from	their	parents	do	not	feel	truly
loved.	They	feel	that	something	is	wrong	with	them,	and	with	their	relationship	with	their
parents.	They	feel	insecure.	They	feel	they	have	done	something	their	parents	don’t	like,
and	they	don’t	know	what	it	was.
In	 our	 society,	 sustained	 eye	 contact	 is	 usually	 accompanied	 by	 a	 criticism	 or	 a
complaint.	We	fix	our	eyes	on	our	children	when	we	are	angry	with	them,	but	we	very
--- Page 228 ---
seldom	look	intently	at	them	
just	as	an	expression	of	love.	Many	children	grow	up	feeling
very	uncomfortable	with	direct	eye	contact	of	any	kind.	They	feel	it	is	a	hostile	act	and
they	look	away	to	avoid	it.
When	people	have	just	fallen	in	love,	they	sit	and	stare	into	each	other’s	eyes	for	a	long
time.	This	is	a	way	that	one	adult	says	to	another,	“I	love	you.”	You	can	try	this	with	your
children.	You	will	be	amazed	at	the	impact	that	sustained,	loving	eye	contact	has	when
you	give	it	to	your	children,	especially	if	they	have	not	experienced	it	for	a	while.
Second,	you	can	tell	your	children	you	love	them	with	
physical	contact
.	Hugging	and
kissing	your	children	is	the	most	wonderful	way	to	convey	to	them,	through	touch,	that
you	really	love	and	value	them.	Virginia	Satir,	the	family	therapist,	says	that	children
require	four	hugs	per	day	for	survival,	eight	hugs	per	day	for	health	and	twelve	hugs	per
day	for	growth.	You	just	can’t	hug	and	kiss	them	too	much	when	they’re	growing	up.
Children	who	are	not	hugged	and	kissed	by	their	parents	eventually	come	to	believe
that	they	are	not	worthy	of	being	hugged	and	kissed.	They	feel	insecure.	Their	self-esteem
suffers.	Their	personalities	are	affected.	They	react	with	destructive	behavior.
Research	shows	that	female	children	and	male	children	are	hugged	about	the	same
amount	through	the	first	year	of	life.	After	that,	female	children	continue	to	receive	the
same	amount	of	physical	affection.	But	the	amount	of	hugging	that	a	boy	receives	drops
off	dramatically,	to	about	20	percent	of	that	received	by	a	girl	by	the	age	of	five.
Some	parents	believe	that	if	you	give	a	boy	too	much	affection,	you	will	turn	him	into	a
“sissy.”	However,	exactly	the	opposite	is	true.	Boys	who	receive	lots	of	hugging	and
physical	contact	from	their	parents	grow	up	to	be	strong,	masculine	and	self-confident.
Boys	who	receive	little	or	no	physical	contact	from	their	parents	can	grow	up	feeling
insecure,	unloved	and	lacking	in	self-confidence.
There	is	a	school	of	thought	that	holds	that	much	of	the	extra	aggressiveness	boys	show
when	they	are	growing	up	is	related	to	this	lack	of	hugging	and	physical	contact,	in
comparison	to	that	received	by	girls.	Although	this	idea	ignores	the	role	of	testosterone	in
making	 boys	 more	 rambunctious,	 you	 can	 still	 never	 hurt	 the	 physical,	 emotional	 or
mental	development	of	a	boy	by	giving	him	too	much	physical	warmth	in	his	earlier	years.
Third,	and	perhaps	the	most	powerful	way	to	tell	a	child	that	you	really	love	him	or	her,
is	
focused	attention
.	Giving	focused	attention	requires	that	you	spend	periods	of	unbroken
time	with	your	son	or	daughter.	Children	need	to	be	with	their	parents.	They	need	to	talk
to	their	parents,	to	relate	to	them,	to	be	around	them	while	they	are	growing	up.	They	need
this	time	like	they	need	food	for	healthy	growth.
The	debate	over	“quality	time”	versus	“quantity	time”	misses	the	point.	The	fact	is	that
quality	time	is	a	
function
	of	quantity	time.	Quality	time,	those	precious	moments	and
experiences	 that	 you	 share	 with	 your	 child,	 comes	 as	 the	 result	 of	 spending	 large
quantities
	of	time	with	your	child.	And	there’s	no	substitute	for	it.
You	cannot	just	say,	“Well,	let’s	have	some	quality	time.”	You	must	be	willing	to	invest
a	lot	of	time,	perhaps	many	hours,	if	you	want	to	enjoy	the	moments	of	“quality	time”	that
are	so	important	in	the	relationship	between	a	parent	and	child.
There	is	probably	no	better	way	to	build	a	high-quality	relationship	with	your	child
--- Page 229 ---
than	to	schedule	long	unbroken	periods	of	time	with	him	or	her.	Your	children	need	to
communicate	their	thoughts	and	feelings	to	someone	who	is	important	to	them,	and	you,
as	their	parent,	should	be	the	most	important	person	in	their	lives.
If	their	parents	do	not	take	the	time	to	sit	with	them	and	listen,	children	will	begin	to
spend	more	and	more	time	with	their	peer	groups.	They	will	seek	approval	and	acceptance
from	them,	and	be	guided	by	their	behavior	and	priorities.
The	most	positive	influence	you	can	exert	in	your	teenager’s	life	is	to	be	the	
primary
source	of	love,	support	and	respect	for	your	child.	If	your	child	does	not	receive	this	love
and	 support	 from	 you,	 your	 ability	 to	 influence	 your	 child’s	 behavior	 will	 begin	 to
diminish	rapidly.	A	gulf	will	grow	between	you.	He	or	she	will	reject	your	advice,	your
values	and	your	world	view.
PRAISE	AND	ENCOURAGEMENT
Give	your	children	continual	praise	and	encouragement	for	the	positive	things	they	do,
even	small	things.	Praise	and	reinforce	what	you	would	like	to	see	repeated.	Praise	them
to	build	their	self-esteem	and	self-confidence.
If	your	child	comes	home	from	school	with	grades	ranging	from	A	to	D,	compliment
and	praise	your	child	on	the	good	grades,	and	then	encourage	the	child	to	do	better	in	the
areas	where	he	or	she	is	weak.	Praise	is	like	an	elixir,	or	tonic,	to	the	psychological	health
of	your	child.	The	child’s	personality	is	formed	and	developed	by	the	love	and	praise	he	or
she	receives	from	you.	When	you	praise	and	encourage	your	child	for	successes,	you
motivate	him	or	her	to	achieve	even	greater	successes	so	he	or	she	can	get	even	more
praise	and	encouragement.
Praising	raises	your	child’s	self-esteem	and	increases	his	or	her	self-respect.	Praise
improves	your	child’s	self-image.	Praise	causes	your	child	to	believe	in	himself	or	herself,
and	gives	your	child	the	confidence	to	try	even	bigger	and	better	things.
VULNERABILITY
Never	 use	
destructive	 criticism
	 on	 your	 children.	 They	 are	 extremely	 vulnerable	 to
criticism	of	any	kind	from	you.	It	tears	them	up	inside.	They	may	not	react	visibly,	but
inside	they	hurt	terribly	whenever	they	are	criticized	for	any	reason	by	the	important
adults	in	their	lives.
Destructive	criticism	has	done	more	to	destroy	more	personalities	than	all	the	wars	in
history.	Most	of	our	adult	personality	problems	were	originally	caused	by	destructive
criticism	from	one	or	both	of	our	parents.	When	we	in	turn	criticize	our	child,	he	or	she
feels	unloved,	undeserving	and	insecure.	Our	child	feels	rotten	inside.	He	or	she	feels
discouraged	and	depressed.
Often	 parents	 criticize	 their	 children	 in	 an	 attempt	 to	
increase
	 their	 effectiveness.
However,	 destructive	 criticism	 actually	 lowers	 your	 child’s	 estimate	 of	 his	 or	 her
competence,	his	or	her	self-concept.	As	your	child’s	self-concept	diminishes,	his	or	her
level	of	effectiveness	
decreases
	commensurably.	Criticism	of	any	kind	can	cause	your
--- Page 230 ---
child’s	performance	to	deteriorate	to	the	point	where	often	he	or	she	will	avoid	the	activity
altogether.	Your	child	then	gets	worse,	not	better.
There	is	a	wonderful	little	piece	of	advice	by	Dorothy	Noltie	which	every	parent	should
memorize.	It	is	called	“Children	Learn	What	They	Live,”	and	it	goes	like	this:
If	a	child	lives	with	criticism,
He	learns	to	condemn.
If	a	child	lives	with	hostility,
He	learns	to	fight.
If	a	child	lives	with	ridicule,
He	learns	to	be	shy.
If	a	child	lives	with	shame,
He	learns	to	feel	guilty.
If	a	child	lives	with	tolerance,
He	learns	to	be	patient.
If	a	child	lives	with	encouragement,
He	learns	confidence.
If	a	child	lives	with	praise,
He	learns	to	appreciate.
If	a	child	lives	with	fairness,
He	learns	justice.
If	a	child	lives	with	security,
He	learns	to	have	faith.
If	a	child	lives	with	approval,
He	learns	to	like	himself.
If	a	child	lives	with	acceptance	and	friendship,
He	learns	to	find	love	in	the	world.
REMEMBER	TO	ASK	YOURSELF	WHAT’S
IMPORTANT
Whenever	you	are	faced	with	a	challenging	situation	involving	your	child,	you	need,
more	than	ever,	to	ask	the	question,	“
What’s	important	here?”
	And	the	correct	answer	is
always	that	raising	your	child	with	high	self-esteem	and	self-confidence	is	your	true	aim
and	your	real	role.	It	is	not	to	be	
right
.	It’s	not	to	get	the	child	to	conform	to	your
expectations.	It’s	to	raise	him	or	her	happy,	healthy	and	self-confident.
Listen	to	your	intuition.	After	you	have	read	all	the	books	and	taken	all	of	the	advice,
the	intuition	of	a	loving	parent	is	almost	always	superior	to	that	of	any	other	input.	You
will	always	know,	deep	inside,	what	is	right	for	your	child.	And	as	long	as	your	every
decision	and	behavior	is	guided	by	love,	you	will	always	be	doing	the	right	thing.
WHAT	CONDITIONS	PRODUCE	HIGH	ACHIEVERS?
Dr.	David	McClelland	of	Harvard,	author	
of	The	Achieving	Society
,	did	many	years	of
research	 into	 parenting	 and	 how	 parenting	 styles	 affected	 achievement	 motivation	 in
--- Page 231 ---
children.	He	found	that	there	were	two	primary	characteristics	of	the	households	that
produced	
high	achievers
,	defined	as	boys	and	girls	who	began	to	achieve	noteworthy
things	in	their	teens	and	early	twenties.
A	DEMOCRATIC	ENVIRONMENT
The	first	characteristic	of	both	the	household	and	the	parenting	style	that	produced	high
achievers	was	that	it	was	
democratic
.	The	opinions	of	the	children	were	solicited	and
respected.	The	children	were	encouraged	to	give	their	input	on	family	decisions	from	an
early	 age.	 They	 were	 asked	 what	 they	 thought	 and	 how	 they	 felt.	 Their	 input	 was
carefully	considered.	The	children’s	opinions	weren’t	necessarily	acted	upon	in	every
case.	But	the	children’s	thoughts	and	ideas	were	valued.	The	whole	family	took	time	to
discuss	and	agree	upon	matters	together.
There	are	few	things	that	make	a	child	feel	better	than	to	be	treated	as	an	intelligent,
thinking	person	by	his	or	her	parents.	When	you	treat	children	as	if	they	are	important	and
intelligent,	they	will	surprise	you	with	how	smart	and	insightful	they	really	are.
Often	around	our	dinner	table,	when	I	am	wrestling	with	a	problem	at	work,	I	will
explain	it	in	simple	terms	to	Christina,	who	is	twelve,	and	ask	for	her	advice.	She	often
comes	up	with	remarkable	insights.	The	old	saying,	“From	the	mouths	of	babes,”	turns	out
to	be	very	true.	Children	can	sometimes	see	situations	with	an	objectivity	and	clarity	their
parents	lack.	When	you	ask	for	your	child’s	advice	in	any	situation,	you	may	be	surprised
at	the	quality	of	the	answer	you	get.	But	the	most	important	thing	is	that	you	
ask
.	This
builds	the	child’s	self-esteem	and	sense	of	personal	worth.	Asking	your	child	for	his	or	her
opinions	or	advice	is	a	sign	of	how	much	you	respect	him	or	her,	and	it	increases	his	or	her
self-respect.
POSITIVE	EXPECTATIONS
The	 second	 characteristic	 of	 parents	 who	 raise	 high	 achievers	 is	 that	 of	 “positive
expectations.”	High-achieving	young	people	grow	up	in	homes	in	which	their	parents	are
continually	telling	them	how	much	they	believe	in	them	and	how	confident	they	are	that
they	are	going	to	do	good	work	and	accomplish	great	things	with	their	lives.
When	you	say	to	your	child,	“You	can	do	it,”	or	“I	believe	in	you,”	you	encourage	him
or	her	to	believe	in	himself	or	herself.	You	encourage	your	child	to	attempt	more	than	he
or	she	would	in	the	absence	of	your	words	of	encouragement.	Children	who	grow	up	as
the	recipients	of	positive	expectations	always	do	better	at	everything	they	attempt.
Here’s	an	important	point.	Positive	expectations	are	not	the	same	as	demands.	Many
parents	think	that	they	are	expressing	positive	expectations	when	in	fact	they	are	simply
demanding	 that	 their	 children	 perform	 to	 a	 particular	 standard.	 A	 demand	 is	 always
associated	with	
conditional	love
,	 with	 the	 idea	 that	 if	 the	 child	 does	 not	 perform	 to
expectations,	the	love	and	support	of	the	parent	will	be	withdrawn.
It	is	important	to	convey	to	your	children	that,	no	matter	how	well	or	poorly	they	do,
you	 love	 them	 totally	 and	 unconditionally.	 If	 the	 child	 feels	 that	 your	 love	 will	 be
--- Page 232 ---
withdrawn	if	he	or	she	performs	poorly,	your	child	will	be	nervous	and	insecure.	Even	if
your	child	does	well,	he	or	she	will	get	no	pleasure	and	no	lasting	satisfaction	from	his	or
her	success.
HOMEWORK	AND	EDUCATION
Parents	who	raise	high-achieving	young	people	have	specific	attitudes	toward	homework.
They	are	very	clear	about	the	importance	of	homework	and	of	doing	well	in	school.	They
insist	that	their	children	complete	their	school	assignments	on	time.	In	every	single	study,
the	single	most	important	factor	accounting	for	high	scholastic	achievement	is	the	parents’
attitude	toward	learning	and	their	involvement	in	the	child’s	education.
One	determinant	of	excellent	schoolwork	is	where	and	when	
the	homework	is	done.	In
the	homes	that	produced	high	achievers,	the	homework	was	done	at	the	family	dinner
table	before	or	after	dinner,	with	the	television	off,	and	in	the	presence	of	the	parents.	The
parents	 volunteered	 to	 help	 the	 children	 with	 their	 homework	 and	 to	 familiarize
themselves	with	their	children’s	assignments	if	necessary.
Low	achievers,	on	the	other	hand,	came	from	homes	in	which	the	parents	sent	the
children	to	their	rooms	to	do	their	homework,	if	they	took	any	interest	in	the	homework	at
all.	When	children	are	sent	to	their	rooms	to	do	their	homework,	the	message	they	receive
is	that	the	homework,	and	therefore	the	schoolwork,	is	not	important.	Children	who	do	not
learn	to	complete	their	homework	by	the	age	of	ten	are	very	seldom	able	to	do	good
schoolwork	later	in	their	academic	careers.
If	you	want	your	children	to	do	their	best	at	school,	you	must	get	totally	involved	in
every	phase	of	their	education.	As	I’ve	said	before,	life	is	the	study	of	attention.	You
always	pay	more	attention	to	that	which	you	most	value.	When	you	pay	close	attention	to
the	schoolwork	and	school	activities	of	your	child,	he	or	she	places	a	far	higher	value	and
importance	on	those	activities.	If	you	ignore	his	or	her	homework	and	schoolwork,	the
child	gets	the	message	that	they	are	unimportant	and	tends	to	ignore	them	as	well.
BUILD	THEIR	SELF-ESTEEM
You	can	help	build	your	child’s	self-esteem	by	teaching	him	or	her	to	say,	“I	like	myself,”
from	an	early	age.	I	have	them	stand	in	front	of	the	mirror	and	repeat,	“I	like	myself,	I	like
myself,	I	like	myself.”	Children	who	learn	to	build	and	maintain	their	own	levels	of	self-
esteem	have	far	better	self-concepts	than	children	who	do	not.
Children	with	high,	positive	self-concepts	do	well	in	school.	They	do	not	engage	in
vandalism	or	get	into	trouble.	They	don’t	do	destructive	things	to	their	bodies.	They	are
more	capable	of	resisting	the	negative	influences	of	their	peer	groups.	They	have	stronger
characters.
Children	with	high	self-concepts,	high	self-esteem,	are	independent	in	their	thinking.
They	are	more	likely	to	think	for	themselves,	and	to	orient	themselves	toward	success,
achievement	and	personal	fulfillment.	They	are	more	focused	on	realizing	their	potential
than	on	compensating	for	their	deficiencies.
--- Page 233 ---
When	 your	 child	 feels	 terrific	 about	 himself	 or	 herself,	 he	 or	 she	 develops	 better
judgment	about	the	things	that	are	good	for	him	or	her	in	the	long	term.	He	or	she
develops	the	ability	to	delay	gratification	in	the	short	term	in	order	to	enjoy	greater
rewards	in	the	future.
SET	A	GOOD	EXAMPLE
If	you	really	want	to	raise	happy,	healthy,	self-confident	children	you	need	to	set	a	good
example,	to	be	a	role	model	of	the	kind	of	person	you	want	them	to	become.
Children	 learn	 largely	 by	 imitation	 during	 their	 formative	 years.	 They	 learn	 by
watching	you	and	listening	to	you	and	imitating	your	words	and	your	behavior.
When	you	become	a	parent	and	set	yourself	up	as	a	role	model,	you	no	longer	have	the
luxury	of	doing	and	saying	whatever	you	want.	You	have	to	be	much	more	aware	of	your
behavior	and	its	likely	impact	on	your	children.
If	you	want	your	children	to	grow	up	with	good	health	habits,	you	must	set	an	example
by	eating	the	right	foods	and	making	the	right	foods	available	in	your	household.	If	you
want	your	children	to	avoid	drinking,	smoking	and	other	addictive	habits,	you	need	to	set
an	example	in	your	own	behavior	in	these	areas.	If	you	want	your	children	to	spend	more
time	reading,	rather	than	watching	television,	you	need	to	set	an	example	by	reading	at
every	opportunity.	If	you	want	your	children	to	develop	patience,	calmness,	poise	and	self-
control,	 you	 need	 to	 be	 a	 model	 of	 these	 qualities,	 even	 under	 the	 most	 trying	 of
circumstances.
Children	are	always	looking	to	their	parents	for	cues	on	how	to	behave,	and	your	being
a	good	role	model	can	have	a	greater	influence	than	almost	anything	else	you	can	possibly
do	in	the	lives	of	your	children.
LOVE	YOUR	SPOUSE
Probably	the	kindest	thing	that	a	man	can	do	for	his	children	is	to	love	their	mother.	And
probably	the	kindest	thing	that	a	mother	can	do	for	her	children	is	to	love	their	father.
Children	learn	about	love	by	growing	up	in	a	household	in	which	love	is	freely	expressed
and	shared.	They	learn	how	to	be	loving	adults	by	observing	the	love	between	their
parents.
You	may	have	been	brought	up	by	parents	who	were	unaware	of	some	of	these	things.
They	may	have	made	many	mistakes	with	you,	especially	the	use	of	destructive	criticism.
They	may	have	never	given	you	the	love	and	affection	you	required.
You’re	a	creature	of	habit.	Your	natural	tendency	as	a	parent	is	to	do	the	
same
	things	to
your	children	that	were	done	to	you.	You	make	the	same	mistakes.	You	do	the	same
hurtful	things	and	you	feel	badly	about	it.	But	
it’s	never	too	late
.	If	you	have	slipped	into
the	habit	of	using	destructive	criticism	on	your	son	or	daughter,	there	is	something	you	can
do	right	now	to	remedy	the	situation	and	rebuild	your	child’s	feeling	of	self-worth.
--- Page 234 ---
TAKING	IT	BACK
Sit	down	with	your	child,	or	children.	Then,	take	a	deep	breath	and	
apologize
	to	them	for
all	the	destructive	criticism,	or	physical	punishment,	that	you	have	ever	used	on	them.
Tell	them	that	you	are	sorry	for	everything	you’ve	ever	said	or	done	that	hurt	them	or
made	them	feel	bad	about	themselves	in	any	way.
One	of	the	biggest	complaints	of	children	of	all	ages	is	that	their	parents	never	say	“I’m
sorry”	or	“I	apologize”	for	mistakes	they	have	made,	or	for	hurtful	things	that	they	have
said	or	done.	Children	are	extremely	sensitive	to	fairness	and	justice.	They	feel	angry	and
hurt	when	
they	perceive
	that	they	have	been	treated	unfairly	or	accused	unjustly	for	any
reason.	If	not	resolved,	this	anger	can	last	for	years.
Your	 purpose	 in	 apologizing	 to	 your	 children	 is	 for	 you	 to	
accept	 complete
responsibility
	for	anything	guilt	producing	that	you	have	ever	said	or	done.	When	you
apologize,	you	demonstrate	to	your	child	that	you	are	a	human	being.	You	are	not	perfect.
You	show	him	or	her	that	you	have	the	character	and	courage	to	admit	that	you	were
wrong.
Many	parents	refuse	to	apologize	to	their	children	because	they	fear	that	their	children
will	not	respect	them.	They	feel	that	they	have	to	project	an	image	of	infallibility	or	their
children	 will	 take	 advantage	 of	 them.	 They	 are	 afraid	 that	 apologizing	 is	 a	 sign	 of
weakness.	Their	egos	are	too	fragile	to	even	consider	it.
However,	exactly	the	opposite	is	true.	When	you	apologize	to	your	child,	you	increase
his	or	her	love	and	respect	for	you.	You	increase	the	likelihood	that	your	child	will
cooperate	with	you	in	the	future.	When	you	don’t	apologize	when	you	are	wrong,	you
make	the	child	angry	and	resentful.	You	lower	your	own	value	in	his	or	her	eyes.
When	you	apologize	to	your	child,	you	remove	the	burden	of	guilt,	negativity	and
unworthiness	that	has	built	up	from	destructive	criticism	in	the	past.	By	apologizing	and
admitting	that	you	were	at	fault	for	your	behavior,	you	set	your	child	free.	The	results	of
the	simple	act	of	apologizing,	of	saying,	“I’m	sorry	for	what	I	did	and	said,”	can	be
immediate	and	amazing.
Many	parents	have	seen	their	children	transformed	overnight	by	the	simple	exercise	of
sitting	them	down	and	saying,	“I’m	sorry	for	anything	and	everything	that	I	have	ever
done	or	said	that	has	hurt	you	in	any	way.”
Children	who	have	been	unreachable,	distant	and	estranged	from	their	parents	for
months,	or	even	years,	have	been	reconciled	with	them	almost	immediately	when	the
parent	has	had	the	courage	and	character	to	accept	responsibility	and	to	apologize.
Once	you	have	apologized,	promise	never	to	use	destructive	criticism	again.	Give	your
children	permission	to	remind	you	when	you	slip	from	time	to	time.	From	then	on,
whenever	you	forget	your	promise,	whenever	you	say	something	in	anger,	immediately
take	it	back	and	say,	“I’m	sorry.”
Children	are	very	resilient.	They	need	and	want	their	parents’	love	and	respect	so	much
that	they	will	always	forgive	and	forget.	Once	you	have	asked	a	child	for	forgiveness,	and
the	child	forgives	you,	the	slate	is	clean.	The	child	feels	liberated,	like	a	prisoner	set	free.
--- Page 235 ---
And	you	are	free	as	well.
When	you	apologize	and	say	you	are	sorry	to	your	children,	you	give	them	permission
to	admit	that	they	also	make	mistakes.	They	don’t	have	to	invest	enormous	amounts	of
emotional	energy	covering	up	and	defending	themselves	as	most	adults	do.	When	you
demonstrate	that	you	have	the	courage	and	character	to	admit	your	mistakes,	you	set	an
example	that	builds	courage	and	character	in	your	children.	They	realize	that	they	don’t
have	to	be	perfect	to	be	acceptable.	They	are	valuable	and	worthwhile	just	as	they	are.
The	most	enduring	relationship	that	you	will	ever	have	is	with	
your	children.	This
relationship	will	last	for	as	long	as	you	live.	If	you	treat	your	children	with	love,	patience
and	understanding,	you	will	reap	the	rewards	all	the	days	of	your	life.
A	QUICK	SUMMARY
First,	the	primary	role	of	parenting	is	to	raise	children	with	high	self-esteem	and	self-
confidence.	This	sets	them	up	for	happiness	and	achievement	as	adults.
Second,	 children	 need	 a	 continuous	 flow	 of	 unconditional	 love,	 approval	 and
acceptance	from	their	parents.	This	is	their	key	requirement	for	healthy	growth.	If	they
don’t	get	it,	they	seek	it	all	their	lives.
Third,	tell	your	children	you	love	them	every	day,	in	both	words	and	actions.	Give	them
loving	eye	contact,	warm	physical	contact	and	focused	attention.	Spend	lots	of	time	with
them,	taking	them	on	walks,	to	the	movies,	on	trips	and	out	on	dates	for	lunch	or	dinner.
Nothing	tells	your	child	more	clearly	how	much	you	love	him	or	her	than	your	investing
lots	of	your	time	in	them.
Fourth,	build	a	high-achieving	environment	for	your	children	by	getting	involved	with
their	education	and	their	homework.	Have	positive	expectations	that	they	will	do	their
very	best.	Tell	them	you	believe	in	them.	Value	their	opinions	and	encourage	them	to
contribute	their	thoughts	and	feelings	to	the	life	of	your	family.	Treat	them	with	respect
and	they	will	respect	themselves.
Fifth,	remember	that	you	are	your	child’s	primary	role	model.	Your	child,	consciously
and	unconsciously,	throughout	his	or	her	entire	life,	will	strive	to	be	like	you,	and	will
treat	other	people	the	way	you	treat	him	or	her.	If	you	treat	your	child	with	kindness,
patience,	love,	respect	and	approval,	your	child	will	grow	up	to	be	a	fully	functioning,
self-actualizing	human	being.	You	can’t	ask	for	much	more	than	that,	and	you	shouldn’t	be
satisfied	with	anything	less.
ACTION	EXERCISE
Ask	yourself	what	it	would	be	like	to	
be	your	own	child
.	Put	yourself	in	the	position	of
your	 child	 or	 your	 children,	 and	 then	 evaluate	 yourself	 as	 a	 parent.	 What	 are	 your
strengths	and	weaknesses?	What	
do	you	do	well	and	what	do	you	do	poorly?	What	are
some	of	the	things	that	you	do	that	might	be	causing	your	children	to	grow	up	with	lower
self-esteem	than	you	would	like?	What	can	you	do,	starting	today,	to	be	a	better	and	more
loving	parent?
--- Page 236 ---
Go	to	your	child	and	ask	him	or	her	if	there	is	anything	he	or	she	feels	you	could	do	to
be	a	better	parent.	Ask	if	there	is	anything	you	do	that	he	or	she	doesn’t	like.	Listen
attentively	to	his	or	her	answers	and	observations.	Don’t	interrupt,	explain	or	defend.
Pause	before	replying.	Question	for	clarification,	by	saying,	“How	do	you	mean?”	or	“For
example?”
Paraphrase	and	feed	it	back	in	your	own	words.	Finally,	commit	yourself	to	doing
something,	to	acting	on	what	he	or	she	has	told	you.	Words	without	actions	are	not
credible.
You	can	become	an	outstanding	parent	by	deciding	to	be	one,	and	by	practicing	what
you’ve	 learned	 in	 this	 chapter	 and	 in	 this	 book.	 This	 is	 perhaps	 the	 most	 important
decision	you	ever	make,	and	the	one	with	the	most	wonderful	payoff.