
--- Page 237 ---
CHAPTER	12
Mastery:	The	Power	of	Love
When	I	was	a	teenager,	before	I	set	out	to	see	the	world,	I	spent	a	good	deal	of	time
thinking	about	the	meaning	of	life.	“Why	am	I	here?	What	is	the	purpose	of	life?	What	is
the	reason	for	existence?	Who	am	I?	Where	did	I	come	from?	And	where	am	I	going?”	I
am	sure	everyone	at	some	time	has	wondered	about	the	reasons	for	his	or	her	individual
existence	on	this	planet.
Even	as	a	young	man,	I	had	come	to	the	conclusion	that	
love
	is	the	most	important
thing	in	the	world.	I	traveled	in	more	than	eighty	countries	over	a	period	of	eight	years,
working	at	different	jobs,	learning	different	languages	and	getting	into	and	out	of	different
situations.	All	the	while	I	still	felt	that	love	was	the	most	important	thing	in	the	world.
I	occasionally	ask	a	person	what	he	or	she	thinks	is	the	most	important	thing	in	life.	I
believe	that	you	can	tell	how	emotionally	mature	a	person	is	by	his	or	her	answer.	In	my
judgment,	the	only	correct	answer	is	love.	I	have	asked	this	question	of	leading	business
people,	politicians,	professionals	and	others	from	every	walk	of	life,	and	I	have	found	that
even	the	most	worldly	and	materialistic	men	or	women	will	admit	upon	questioning	that,
in	their	heart,	they	believe	love	is	more	important	than	anything	else.
In	
Chapter	 One
,	 I	 defined	 success	 as	 a	 composite	 or	 blend	 of	 seven	 different
ingredients.	Each	of	these	ingredients	is	affected	by	the	amount	of	love	that	a	person	has
within	himself	or	herself	and	toward	the	rest	of	the	world.
EVERYTHING	DEPENDS	UPON	LOVE
You	have	
peace	of	mind
	to	the	degree	to	which	you	love	yourself	and	love	others.	You
have	high	levels	of	
health	and	energy
	to	the	degree	to	which	you	experience	self-love,
self-acceptance	and	the	love	and	acceptance	of	others.	You	have	
loving	relationships
	to
the	degree	to	which	you	love	yourself	and	express	your	love	toward	others.	In	many
cases,	love	is	central	to	your	level	of	
financial	achievement
	in	life.	Virtually	all	self-made
millionaires	are	doing	what	they	love	to	do.	To	the	degree	to	which	you	love	yourself	and
love	what	you	are	doing,	you	will	set	
high,	challenging	and	worth-while	goals	and	ideals
to	strive	toward.	Self-love	and	self-acceptance	make	it	easier	for	you	to	gain	greater	
self-
knowledge	 and	 self-understanding
.	 Finally,	 you	 achieve	 lasting	 fulfillment,	
self-
expression	and	self-actualization
	in	life	to	the	exact	degree	to	which	you	love	and	accept
yourself	and	others	unconditionally.
RELATING	LOVE	TO	THE	“LAWS”
You	are	a	mental	creature.	Almost	everything	that	happens	to	you	happens	as	a	result	of
--- Page 238 ---
the	 way	 you	 think.	 If	 you	 change	 or	 improve	 the	 quality	 of	 your	 thinking,	 you
automatically	change	and	improve	the	quality	of	your	life.	Several	of	the	mental	laws	in
this	book	relate	to	the	importance	of	love	and	the	development	of	a	healthy	personality.
They	are	part	of	the	achievement	of	worthwhile	goals	and	aspirations.
The	Law	of	Belief	states	that	whatever	you	believe,	with	feeling,	becomes	your	reality.
If	you	love	and	respect	yourself,	and	you	believe	yourself	capable	of	accomplishing	great
things,	you	are	almost	certain	to	achieve	far	more	than	if	you	doubt	yourself,	or	if	you	do
not	believe	in	your	personal	potential.
The	Law	of	Expectations	states	that	whatever	you	expect,	with	confidence,	becomes	a
self-fulfilling	prophecy.	If	you	expect	the	best	of	yourself	and	others,	which	is	the	natural
expression	of	a	loving	attitude,	you	will	seldom	be	disappointed.	You	will	acquire	far
more	of	the	things	you	want	if	you	confidently	expect	good	things	to	happen	to	you,	and
you	behave	accordingly.
The	Law	of	Attraction	states	that	you	invariably	attract	into	
your	life	people	and
circumstances	in	harmony	with	your	dominant	thoughts.	When	you	think	kind	and	loving
thoughts	about	yourself	and	others,	you	attract	kind	and	loving	people	to	you.	These
people	make	your	life	a	joy.	They	fill	your	life	with	happiness.	They	assure	fulfillment	in
your	work	and	satisfaction	in	your	personal	relationships.
The	Law	of	Correspondence	states	that	your	outer	world	will	be	a	reflection	of	your
inner	 world.	 If	 you	 have	 a	 kind,	 gentle	 and	 loving	 nature,	 your	 outer	 world	 of
relationships,	 health	 and	 material	 success	 will	 be	 marked	 by	 health,	 happiness	 and
prosperity.
The	 Law	 of	 Concentration	 states	 that	 whatever	 you	 dwell	 upon	 grows.	 If	 you
continually	choose	to	think	loving	thoughts	about	yourself	and	others,	you	“grow”	more
loving	relationships	in	every	part	of	your	life.
The	Law	of	Substitution	says	that	you	can	replace	a	negative	thought	with	a	positive
thought.	When	you	consciously	select	the	content	of	your	conscious	mind,	and	keep	your
thoughts	focused	on	love,	patience,	tolerance	and	forgiveness,	you	crowd	out	negative
thoughts	that	disrupt	your	peace	of	mind,	undermine	your	health	and	energy	and	harm
your	relationships.
Love	teaches	us	the	principle	of	nonresistance.	The	Bible	says,	“Judge	not	that	ye	be
not	judged,”	and,	“Pray	for	those	who	spitefully	use	you.”	When	you	respond	to	anger	and
negativity	with	love	and	kindness,	you	not	only	preserve	your	own	emotional	integrity	and
maintain	a	positive	mental	attitude,	but	you	also	help	the	other	person.
There	 is	 nothing	 that	 so	 surprises	 a	 person	 as	 to	 have	 someone	 whom	 they	 are
mistreating	respond	to	them	with	gentleness,	courtesy	and	kindness.	It	frees	him	or	her	to
stop	the	critical	behavior	and	become	a	better	person.
The	Law	of	Superconscious	Activity	states	that	any	thought,	plan,	goal	or	idea	you	can
hold	 continuously	 in	 your	 conscious	 mind	 will	 be	 brought	 into	 reality	 by	 your
superconscious	mind.	You	can	have	a	wonderful	life,	full	of	happy,	loving	relationships,
characterized	by	health,	energy	and	the	experience	of	joy,	by	thinking	continually	about
the	things	you	really	want	in	your	life	and	keeping	your	mind	off	of	the	things	you	don’t
--- Page 239 ---
want.
LOVE	IS	THE	ANSWER
Always,	
love	is	the	answer
.	The	one	thing	that	you	can	never	have	too	much	of	is	love.
You	can	never	have	too	much	love	for	yourself,	and	you	can	never	give	too	much	love	to
others.	Lack	of	love,	or	love	withheld,	lies	at	the	root	of	most	personal	and	behavioral
problems.	Love	is	not	only	the	answer,	but	it	is	the	cure	for	most	of	life’s	problems.
THE	GREAT	ROBBER	EMOTION
Whatever	one’s	religious	beliefs,	it’s	hard	to	deny	the	universal	truth	of	many	of	the
biblical	teachings.	One	of	the	most	beautiful	lines	in	the	New	Testament	is	“God	is	love
and	he	that	dwelleth	in	God,	dwelleth	in	love	and	God	in	him.”
It	also	says,	“There	is	no	fear	in	love,	but	perfect	love	casteth	out	fear.”
These	words	are	important	to	us	because	the	great	robber	of	human	happiness	is,	and
always	has	been,	
fear
	of	some	kind—fear	of	failure,	fear	of	rejection,	fear	of	criticism,
fear	of	losing	someone’s	love	or	respect,	fear	of	ill	health,	fear	of	not	measuring	up	to
other	people’s	expectations	of	us	and	a	generalized	fear	of	not	being	good	enough.
The	only	way	you	can	fulfill	your	potential	as	a	human	being	is	to	gradually	diminish
the	role	that	fear	plays	in	your	life	and	in	your	decisions.	Your	aim	and	your	ideal	must	be
to	reach	the	point	where	you	are	not	afraid	of	anything.	When	you	eliminate	fear	you
become	completely	self-confident,	and	your	entire	world	opens	up	before	you.	And	it	is
love
	that	dissolves	fear	and	eventually	removes	it	from	your	life.
SELF-LOVE,	THE	BEGINNING
Self-esteem	and	self-respect	are	the	foundation	qualities	of	the	truly	healthy	personality.
Everything	you	do	to	raise	your	own	self-esteem	contributes	to	making	you	a	happier
human	being.	No	matter	how	low	your	self-esteem	is	when	you	begin,	you	can	ratchet	
it
up	one	notch	at	a	time,	like	jacking	up	a	car,	by	doing	some	of	the	things	we’ve	talked
about	in	this	book.
You	can	speak	to	yourself	positively	all	the	time.	You	can	visualize	yourself	as	the	very
best	person	that	you	can	possibly	be.	You	can	fill	your	mind	with	positive	messages	of
hope	and	inspiration.	You	can	associate	with	happy,	optimistic,	goal-oriented	people.	You
can	organize	every	part	of	your	life	to	continually	reinforce	good	feelings	about	yourself.
The	more	you	like	or	love	yourself,	the	more	you	will	like	and	love	other	people.	The
amount	of	love	and	respect	you	have	for	others,	and	they	for	you,	is	in	direct	proportion	to
how	much	love	you	have	for	yourself.
The	Law	of	Reversibility	states	that,	just	as	feelings	lead	to	actions,	actions	also	lead	to
feelings.	If	you	do	and	say	the	things	that	are	consistent	with	loving	yourself,	it	won’t	be
long	before	you	actually	feel	positive	and	loving	toward	yourself.	If	you	do	and	say	the
things	that	are	consistent	with	your	desired	results,	the	results	will	materialize	around	you.
--- Page 240 ---
Love	is	the	catalyst	that	activates	the	very	best	that	is	in	you,	and	in	the	people	and
situations	around	you.
The	only	true	measure	of	your	beliefs	is	your	actions.	It	is	not	what	you	
say
,	or	what
you	
wish
	or	
hope
	that	counts,	but	only	what	you	actually	
do
.	It’s	actions,	not	words,	that
count.	And	there	are	several	specific	things	you	can	do	that	combine	to	build	within	you
the	feelings	of	high	self-esteem	and	self-regard	that	make	everything	else	possible.
THE	KEYS	TO	THE	KINGDOM	OF	PERSONAL
ACHIEVEMENT
First,	you	can	resolve	to	
accept	yourself	unconditionally
,	no	matter	what	you	have	done	or
not	 done	 in	 the	 past.	 You	 can	 stand	 back	 and	 appreciate	 your	 special	 qualities	 and
attributes.	You	can	emphasize	your	good	points	and	ignore	the	areas	in	which	you	may
not	be	as	good	as	someone	else.	You	can	like	and	respect	yourself	exactly	as	you	are
rather	than	as	you	would	like	to	be	someday.	The	foundation	of	self-esteem	is	self-
acceptance.
Second,	you	can	build	your	self-esteem,	and	your	sense	of	personal	value,	by	
accepting
complete	responsibility
	for	your	life	and	for	
the	consequences	of	all	your	actions.	When
you	become	a	self-reliant,	self-responsible	individual,	you	refuse	to	blame	or	criticize
others,	or	make	excuses	for	things	in	your	life	that	you	don’t	like.	You	work	on	those	areas
where	you	are	unhappy	rather	than	spending	your	creative	energies	dreaming	up	excuses
or	 blaming	 your	 situation	 on	 others.	 An	 attitude	 of	 high	 self-responsibility	 is	 a
fundamental	part	of	high	self-esteem,	self-love	and	personal	effectiveness.	Each	of	these
interacts	on	and	reinforces	the	other.
Third,	you	can	
set	worthwhile	goals	for	yourself
.	The	very	act	of	setting	a	big	goal	for
yourself	raises	your	self-esteem.	It	improves	your	self-concept.	Only	a	person	who	likes
and	believes	in	himself	or	herself	will	write	down	an	exciting	goal	in	the	first	place.	And
writing	down	the	goal	makes	you	like	and	believe	in	yourself	even	more.	The	very	act	of
setting	the	goal	is	the	starting	point	of	becoming	the	kind	of	person	you	want	to	be.	It	is
the	demonstration	of	your	attitude	of	self-responsibility.	It	is	the	key	to	taking	control	of
your	life	and	feeling	terrific	about	yourself.
The	fourth	way	to	build	self-esteem	is	to	
take	good	care	of	yourself	physically
.	When
you	eat	healthy,	nutritious	foods	and	get	lots	of	sleep	and	regular	exercise,	you	cannot	help
but	feel	better	about	yourself.	The	better	you	take	care	of	yourself,	the	more	self-respect
and	self-love	you	have.	This	feeling	spreads	into	your	relationships	with	others.	When	you
treat	yourself	well,	you	treat	others	well.
Fifth,	and	perhaps	the	fastest	way	to	boost	your	self-esteem,	is	simply	to	
repeat	“I	like
myself	I	like	myself	I	like	myself
”	over	and	over,	fifty	to	one	hundred	times	a	day,	until	you
implant	this	message	deep	in	your	subconscious	mind.	Eventually,	your	subconscious
mind	fully	accepts	this	command	as	your	operating	instructions.	Then	you	will	notice	the
difference.	Your	body	language,	your	attitude,	your	facial	expressions	and	your	tone	of
voice	will	all	change	for	the	better.	You	will	feel	more	positive	and	enthusiastic	about
everything	you	do.	You	will	be	“programmed”	to	feel	good	about	yourself.
--- Page 241 ---
THREE	KINDS	OF	LOVE
The	ancient	Greeks	divided	love	into	three	different	categories.	The	first	type	of	love	they
called	
Eros
.	This	refers	to	self-love.	Most	people	never	get	beyond	this	preoccupation
with	themselves	and	
with	their	own	feelings	in	the	area	of	love.	The	primary	reason	for
failure	and	unhappiness	in	life	is	low	self-esteem.	Because	of	their	low	self-esteem,	most
people	 become	 completely	 concerned	 with	 themselves	 and	 their	 own	 feelings	 to	 the
exclusion	of	the	feelings	of	others.	They	are	
fixed
	at	the	level	of	Eros.	In	extreme	cases	of
neurosis	and	psychosis,	they	become	unable	to	consider	the	feelings	of	others	at	all.
The	second	form	of	love	is	called	
Filia
.	This	refers	to	the	love	of	others.	Once	a	person
loves	himself	or	herself,	the	natural	tendency	is	to	turn	outward	toward	loving	and	caring
for	other	people.	This	is	the	mark	of	the	healthy,	happy	person.
Whenever	 you	 feel	 particularly	 good	 about	 yourself,	 you	 feel	 a	 greater	 sense	 of
kindness,	 patience	 and	 friendship	 toward	 others,	 even	 strangers.	 Whenever	 you	 feel
blessed	in	any	way,	you	instinctively	want	to	reach	out	to	help	others	less	fortunate.	Self-
love	makes	you	generous	and	big-hearted	in	everything	you	do.
The	third	and	highest	form	of	love,	according	to	the	ancient	Greeks,	was	
Charis
,	from
which	we	get	our	word	
charismatic
.	Charis	refers	to	universal	love,	love	for	all	mankind,
and	is	the	rarest	type	of	love.	Only	a	very	few	people	ever	rise	to	this	level	of	personal
development.	Many	of	the	greatest	men	and	women	who	have	ever	lived,	such	as	Jesus,
Buddha	and	St.	Francis	of	Assisi,	were	renowned	for	their	amazing	capacity	to	love	so
expansively.	And	these	great	lovers	of	mankind	have	had	more	positive	impact	on	the
history	of	mankind	than	all	the	kings	and	rulers	who	ever	lived.
LOVE	TRANSFORMS	THE	WORLD
Jesus	of	Nazareth	is	referred	to	as	the	“Apostle	of	love.”	The	followers	of	Christianity
consider	Jesus	to	have	been	the	perfect	man,	who	expressed	total	and	unconditional	love
for	all	people,	even	under	the	most	trying	and	painful	of	circumstances.	It	is	this	model	or
ideal	of	perfect	love	that	most	people	strive	toward	throughout	their	lives.
Prince	Siddhartha,	Gautama	Buddha,	who	founded	Buddhism	in	the	sixth	century	
B.C
.,
continues	to	be	an	inspiration	to	millions	because	of	his	totally	loving	nature	and	his
teachings	for	overcoming	fear	and	attaining	bliss.
St.	Francis	of	Assisi	is	famous	for	expressing	unbounded	love,	extending	to	the	birds,
the	 animals,	 the	 flowers	 and	 even	 the	 lowly	
worms	 and	 bugs.	 This	 standard	 of
unconditional	love	for	all	living	creatures	has	made	St.	Francis	of	Assisi	a	role	model	and
a	hero	to	millions	of	people	down	the	generations.
Dr.	Albert	Schweitzer	of	Africa,	whom	I	met	and	worked	with	in	1965,	is	recognized	as
perhaps	the	greatest	humanitarian	of	the	twentieth	century.	His	overarching	philosophy
was	called	“reverence	for	life.”	He	lived	and	practiced	this	philosophy	for	more	than	fifty
years,	ministering	to	the	needs	of	the	people	of	Central	Africa.	His	example	became	an
inspiration	to	millions	throughout	the	world.
In	our	modern	day,	Mother	Teresa	of	Calcutta	has	become	perhaps	the	most	respected
--- Page 242 ---
person	in	the	world.	She	has	had	a	tremendous	impact	on	the	hearts	and	minds	of	millions
of	men	and	women	because	of	her	unconditional	love	toward	the	poor	and	dying	in
Calcutta,	India.	When	she	was	once	asked	how	it	was	that	her	Missionaries	of	Charity
seemed	so	happy	as	they	went	about	their	tasks	of	providing	solace	to	unfortunate	people
during	their	final	hours,	she	replied	by	saying	that	each	worker	believes	in	the	words	of
the	Book	of	Matthew,	“Inasmuch	as	you	have	done	it	to	the	least	of	these	my	brethren,	you
have	done	it	unto	me.”
LOVE	IS	AN	ACTIVE	VERB
The	word	love	is	a	verb,	an	active	verb.	Love	is	not	just	something	that	you	
feel;
	it	is
something	that	you	
do
.	In	fact,	because	of	the	Law	of	Reversibility,	whenever	you	engage
in	a	loving	behavior	toward	someone	else,	you	deepen	and	intensify	your	feeling	of	love
toward	that	person.	The	action	of	love	and	kindness	generates	the	feeling	of	love	and
kindness.
Just	as	you	can	act	yourself	into	love,	you	can	act	yourself	
back
	into	love,	even	if	you
feel	that	the	love	you	experienced	earlier	has	diminished	or	gone.
The	Greek	word	for	this	is	“Praxis.”	Praxis	means	that	it	is	the	
practice
	of	the	actions
that	accompany	the	emotion	that	actually	creates	the	emotion	itself.
You	can	act	your	way	back	into	love	by	treating	the	other	person	exactly	as	you	would
if	you	were	deeply	in	love	with	him	or	her.	You	can	maintain	the	love	in	your	relationship
by	treating	the	person	as	you	did	when	you	were	courting	him	or	her,	or	when	you	most
intensely	felt	
in	love
.	If	you	continue	to	behave	this	way	
throughout	the	relationship,	you
will	maintain	the	feelings	of	love	that	brought	you	together.	But	if	a	person	forgets	and
starts	to	take	the	relationship	for	granted,	if	he	or	she	stops	doing	the	things	that	signify
and	demonstrate	love,	the	feelings	of	love	can	begin	to	diminish,	and	problems	may	begin
to	arise.
THE	KEY	TO	HAPPINESS
The	happiest	of	all	men	and	women	are	those	who	continually	look	for	ways	to	show
love,	kindness	and	affection	toward	the	people	around	them.	Not	only	are	they	the	most
loved	and	respected	by	others,	but	they	are	also	the	healthiest	and	the	most	blessed	of	all
human	beings.
There	is	a	wonderful	poem	by	Leigh	Hunt,	called	“Abou	Ben	Adhem”:
Abou	Ben	Adhem	(may	his	tribe	increase!)
Awoke	one	night	from	a	deep	dream	of	peace,
And	saw	within	the	moonlight	in	his	room,
Making	it	rich,	and	like	a	Lily	in	bloom,
An	Angel,	writing	in	a	Book	of	Gold;
Exceeding	peace	had	made	Ben	Adhem	bold,
And	to	the	presence	in	the	room	he	said,
“What	writest	thou?”	The	vision	raised	his	head
--- Page 243 ---
And	with	a	look	made	of	all	sweet	accord,
Answered,	“The	names	of	those	who	love	the	Lord.”
“And	is	mine	one?”	said	Abou.	“Nay,	not	so,”
Replied	the	Angel.	Abou	then	spoke	more	low,
But	surely	still;	and	said,	“I	pray	thee	then,
Write	me	as	one	that	loves	his	fellow	men.”
The	Angel	wrote	and	vanished.	The	next	night
It	came	again,	with	a	great	wakening	light,
And	showed	the	names	whom	love	of	God	has	blessed,
And,	lo!	Ben	Adhem’s	name	led	all	the	rest.
SOWING	AND	REAPING
You	can	never	have	any	more	love	for	yourself	than	that	which	you	
express
	to	other
people.	Love	only	grows	by	
sharing
,	and	the	only	
way	you	can	have	any	more	love	for
yourself	is	by	giving	it	away.	The	more	you	give	away,	the	more	you	have.
By	the	same	token,	the	less	you	express	love,	the	less	love	you	have	for	yourself.	If	you
do	not	express	love	at	all,	you	will	turn	inward	on	yourself	and	become	angry,	critical	and
unhappy.
The	antidote	to	feelings	of	fear,	doubt	and	low	self-esteem	is	to	get	out	and	find
someone	else	you	can	help,	someone	else	you	can	express	love	toward.	The	best	cure	for
unhappiness	is	to	make	someone	else	happy.
Most	people	have	it	the	other	way	around.	When	they	are	feeling	unhappy	or	unloved,
they	feel	that	the	solution	is	for	someone	else	to	make	them	happy,	for	someone	else	to
love	them	and	solve	their	problems.	However,	love	is	something	that	you	
do
.	Love	is
expressed	 in	 positive	 and	 constructive	 behavior	 toward	 other	 people.	 If	 you	 practice
expressing	love,	you	will	have	no	problem	getting	love	back,	and	eventually	filling	your
life	with	it.	You	control	the	amount	of	love	you	have	in	your	life	by	how	much	of	it	you
give	away	to	others.	Be	generous!
Elizabeth	Barrett	Browning	wrote	one	of	the	most	beautiful	poems	on	love	ever	put	on
paper.	It	has	been	one	of	my	favorites	for	many	years	and	it	is	called	“How	Do	I	Love
Thee?”
How	do	I	love	thee?	Let	me	count	the	ways.
I	love	thee	to	the	depth	and	breadth	and	height
My	soul	can	reach,	when	feeling	out	of	sight
For	the	ends	of	Being	and	ideal	Grace.
I	love	thee	to	the	level	of	everyday’s
Most	quiet	need,	by	sun	and	candle-light.
I	love	thee	freely,	as	men	strive	for	Right;
I	love	thee	purely,	as	they	turn	from	Praise.
I	love	thee	with	the	passion	put	to	use
In	my	old	griefs,	and	with	my	childhood’s	faith.
I	love	thee	with	a	love	I	seemed	to	lose
With	my	lost	saints—I	love	thee	with	the	breath,
--- Page 244 ---
Smiles,	tears,	of	all	my	life!—and,	if	God	choose,
I	shall	but	love	thee	better	after	death.
Throughout	the	ages,	the	wisest	men	and	women	have	come	to	the	conclusion	that
nothing	is	more	important	than	love.	Since	you	
are	a	self-responsible	individual,	it	is	up	to
you	to	improve	the	quality	of	your	life	by	increasing	and	improving	your	expression	of
love	and	kindness	to	the	people	in	your	world.
NEGATIVITY	IS	THE	ROADBLOCK
The	greatest	obstacles	to	the	experience	and	expression	of	love	are	
negative	emotions
,
especially	those	of	fear,	anger,	guilt	and	resentment.	Almost	everyone	is	still	harboring
negative	feelings	toward	someone	who	has	hurt	them	in	the	past.	Many	people	carry
around	anger	and	resentment	toward	their	parents	for	forty	or	fifty	years,	if	not	into	their
graves.	It	is	quite	common	for	people	to	still	be	angry	and	resentful	toward	someone	in	a
previous	relationship	or	marriage.	Often	an	unsuccessful	job,	or	a	business	venture	that
goes	sour,	will	generate	these	negative	emotions.	If	a	person	clings	to	these	feelings,	by
dwelling	upon	them,	he	or	she	keeps	them	alive	year	after	year,	long	after	the	incident	has
passed.
SET	YOURSELF	FREE
You	can	clear	your	mind	and	heart	of	the	negativity	you	have	built	up	over	time	with	one
decisive	action:	Issue	a	blanket	pardon	to	everyone	for	everything	that	they	have	ever
done	to	hurt	you	in	any	way.
The	doorway	that	opens	to	a	life	of	love	and	joy	is	forgiveness.	Your	ability	to	freely
forgive	other	people,	and	to	let	the	hurt	go,	is	the	true	mark	of	integrity,	courage,	character
and	a	fully	developed	personality.
Many	people	cling	to	their	resentments	because	they	feel	that	they	have	paid	so	dearly
for	them	that	they	cannot	possibly	give	them	up.	Sometimes	people’s	entire	lives	are	built
around	their	past	hurts	and	suffering.	They	have	little	else	to	talk	about,	and	they	dwell	on
their	negative	experiences	continually.
Eventually,	these	people	make	themselves	physically	and	mentally	ill.	Their	repressed
anger	and	negativity	sooner	or	later	erupt	and	spoil	any	new	relationships	that	they	try	to
build.	They	sabotage	their	own	futures.	And,	in	every	case,	there	is	only	one	solution	and
that	is	to	forgive	and	let	it	go.
Forgiving	another	person	is	a	perfectly	
selfish
	act.	You	do	it	so	that	you	can	be	free.
You	forgive	so	that	you	can	experience	the	happiness	and	joy	for	which	you	were	created.
And	here	is	a	little	test:	If	you	have	truly	forgiven	another	person,	you	can	demonstrate	it
to	yourself	by	doing	the	other	person	a	favor,	or	sending	the	other	person	a	gift.	Only	in
this	way	can	you	prove	to	yourself,	once	and	for	all,	that	you	are	finally	free	of	the
negative	emotions	associated	with	that	person.	(Refer	to	“the	letter”	described	in	
Chapter
Five
.)
If	you	find	that	you	still	cannot	bring	yourself	to	do	a	kindness	for	the	other	person,	this
--- Page 245 ---
should	tell	you	something	about	your	true	feelings.	This	inability	to	forgive	might	be
holding	you	back	from	loving	yourself	and	other	people.	You	might	have	your	own	foot
on	the	brakes	of	your	own	future	happiness.
THE	GREATEST	OF	THESE
One	of	the	most	beautiful	descriptions	of	love	from	the	Bible	is	First	Corinthians,	Chapter
Thirteen.	We	had	this	entire	passage	read	at	our	wedding:
	
Though	I	speak	with	the	tongues	of	men	and	of	angels,	and	have	not
love,	I	am	become	as	sounding	brass,	or	a	tinkling	cymbal.
And	though	I	have	the	gift	of	prophecy,	and	understand	all	mysteries,
and	all	knowledge;	and	though	I	have	all	faith,	so	that	I	could	remove
mountains,	and	have	not	love,	I	am	nothing.
And	though	I	bestow	all	my	goods	to	feed	the	poor,	and	though	I	give
my	body	to	be	burned,	and	have	not	love,	it	profiteth	me	nothing.
Love	suffereth	long,	and	is	kind;	love	envieth	not;	love	vaunteth	not
itself,	is	not	puffed	up,
Love	does	not	behave	itself	unseemly,	love	seeketh	not	her	own,	love	is
not	easily	provoked,	and	love	thinketh	no	evil;
Love	rejoiceth	not	in	iniquity,	but	rejoiceth	in	the	truth;
Love	beareth	all	things,	believeth	all	things,	hopeth	all	things,	endureth
all	things.
Love	never	faileth;	but	whether	there	be	prophecies,	they	shall	fail;
whether	there	be	tongues,	they	shall	cease;	whether	there	be	knowledge,	it
shall	vanish	away.
For	we	know	in	part,	and	we	prophesy	in	part.
But	when	that	which	is	perfect	is	come,	then	that	which	is	in	part	shall
be	done	away.
When	I	was	a	child,	I	spake	as	a	child,	I	understood	as	a	child,	I	thought
as	a	child:	but	when	I	became	a	man,	I	put	away	childish	things.
For	now	we	see	through	a	glass,	darkly;	but	then	face	to	face:	now	I
know	in	part;	but	then	shall	I	know	even	as	also	I	am	known.
And	now	abideth	faith,	hope,	love,	these	three;	but	the	greatest	of	these
is	love.
Many	wise	and	intelligent	men	have	written	long	explanations	of	the	inner	meanings	of
First	Corinthians,	Chapter	Thirteen,	but	it	is	safe	to	say	that	what	this	passage	tells	us	is
that	when	we	become	totally	loving	human	beings,	we	will	understand	all,	forgive	all,	and
experience	true	joy	in	every	part	of	our	lives.
--- Page 246 ---
THE	TESTING	TIME
One	of	the	most	important	times	to	be	loving	is	when	you	feel	the	least	like	loving.	The
time	to	draw	on	your	reserves	of	patience,	kindness	and	compassion	is	when	you	are	the
most	displeased	with	another	person.	Obnoxious	or	unpleasant	behavior	is	usually	a	cry
for	help	and	understanding.	It	is	a	way	of	expressing	the	frustration	of	not	feeling	truly
loved	and	accepted.	There	is	wisdom	in	the	words,	“A	gentle	answer	turneth	away	wrath.”
When	you	deal	with	a	difficult	person	in	a	calm	and	loving	way,	you	will	often	see	a
human	miracle.	You	will	often	see	his	or	her	attitude	and	behavior	change.	You	will	often
see	 a	 difficult	 person	 soften	 up	 and	 see	 his	 or	 her	 personality	 brighten.	 But,	 most
important,	when	you	act	in	a	loving	way,	you	maintain	your	own	personal	and	emotional
integrity.	You	feel	good	about	yourself.	You	feel	in	charge	of	your	inner	and	outer	life.
A	SIMPLE	QUESTION	FOR	GUIDANCE
Some	years	ago,	the	best-selling	book	
In	His	Steps
	was	written	about	a	small	town	in
America	where	everyone	began	living	the	highest	values	they	knew.	Before	saying	or
doing	anything,	each	person	in	the	town	would	ask	himself	or	herself	the	question,	“What
would	Jesus	do?”
In	other	words,	what	would	a	person	who	was	truly	honest,	truly	kind,	truly	loving,
truly	patient,	all-compassionate	and	all-wise	do	in	this	situation?
It	 was	 a	 wonderful	 story.	 After	 the	 initial	 problems	 of	 being	 misunderstood	 were
surmounted,	everyone	in	the	town	experienced	greater	peace	and	happiness.	People	and
businesses	 were	 more	 prosperous.	 Misunderstandings	 were	 quickly	 cleared	 up.
Throughout	the	entire	town,	there	was	a	feeling	of	joy,	happiness	and	peace.
CHANGE	YOUR	WORLD
You	cannot	change	the	world,	but	you	can	present	the	world	with	one	improved	person,
yourself
.	You	can	go	to	work	on	yourself	to	make	yourself	into	the	kind	of	person	you
admire	and	respect.	You	can	become	a	role	model	and	set	a	standard	for	others.	You	can
control	and	discipline	yourself	to	resist	acting	or	speaking	in	a	negative	way	toward
anyone	for	any	reason.	You	can	insist	upon	always	doing	things	the	loving	way	rather
than	the	hurtful	way.
You	can	use	the	
cognitive	control	method
	to	keep	your	mind	calm	and	positive	by
thinking	 kind	 and	 loving	 thoughts	 about	 others.	 You	 can	 short-circuit	 your	 anger	 by
thinking	kindly	about	those	who	hurt	you.	By	saying,	“God	bless	him,”	or	“God	bless
her,”	 rather	 than	 thinking	 about	 how	 much	 he	 or	 she	 is	 exasperating	 you,	 you	 can
neutralize	your	negative	emotions,	restore	your	calmness	and	increase	your	clarity	of
mind.	You	take	another	step	on	the	pathway	toward	becoming	an	exceptional	human
being.
THE	PURPOSE	OF	LIFE
--- Page 247 ---
“With	all	thy	getting,	get	love.”	Everything	you	ever	read	about	the	meaning	and	purpose
of	life	brings	you	back	to	the	idea	and	the	importance	of	love.	Everything	you	do	that
makes	you	love	and	respect	yourself	makes	you	more	capable	of	expressing	love	toward
others.	Every	time	you	do	or	say	anything	kind	or	loving	toward	another	person,	you
increase	the	amount	of	love	you	have	for	yourself.	The	action	is	reciprocal.	One	generates
the	other.
Every	time	you	engage	in	a	loving	act,	you	make	the	world	a	better	place	in	which	to
live.	Each	time	you	express	love	toward	someone	else,	whether	they	seem	to	need	it	or
not,	you	enrich	and	enhance	the	quality	of	his	or	her	life.	You	simultaneously	enrich	and
uplift	the	quality	of	your	own.	You	put	yourself	on	the	side	of	the	angels.	You	make	your
life	a	blessing	to	others	and	a	wonderful	experience	for	yourself.
One	of	the	finest	pieces	of	writing	on	love	is	“The	Golden	Gate”	by	Emmet	Fox.	It	has
been	a	source	of	inspiration	for	me	for	many	years.
	
Love	casts	out	fear.
It	covers	a	multitude	of	sins.
It	is	absolutely	invincible.
There	is	no	difficulty	that	enough	love	will	not	conquer;
No	disease	that	enough	love	will	not	heal;
No	door	that	enough	love	will	not	open;
No	gulf	that	enough	love	will	not	bridge;
No	wall	that	enough	love	will	not	throw	down;
No	sin	that	enough	love	will	not	redeem.
It	makes	no	difference	how	deeply	seated	may	be	the	trouble,
How	hopeless	the	outlook,
How	muddled	the	tangle,	how	great	the	mistake.
A	sufficient	realization	of	love	will	dissolve	it	all.
If	only	you	could	love	enough,	you	would	be	the	happiest
and	the	most	powerful	being	in	the	world.
If	you	truly	want	to	be	successful	and	happy	in	everything	you	do,	in	every	part	of	your
life,	you	must	learn	and	practice	love	on
A	SIMPLE	QUESTION	FOR	GUIDANCE
Some	years	ago,	the	best-selling	book	
In	His	Steps
	was	written	about	a	small	town	in
America	where	everyone	began	living	the	highest	values	they	knew.	Before	saying	or
doing	anything,	each	person	in	the	town	would	ask	himself	or	herself	the	question,	“What
would	Jesus	do?”
--- Page 248 ---
In	other	words,	what	would	a	person	who	was	truly	honest,	truly	kind,	truly	loving,
truly	patient,	all-compassionate	and	all-wise	do	in	this	situation?
It	 was	 a	 wonderful	 story.	 After	 the	 initial	 problems	 of	 being	 misunderstood	 were
surmounted,	everyone	in	the	town	experienced	greater	peace	and	happiness.	People	and
businesses	 were	 more	 prosperous.	 Misunderstandings	 were	 quickly	 cleared	 up.
Throughout	the	entire	town,	there	was	a	feeling	of	joy,	happiness	and	peace.
CHANGE	YOUR	WORLD
You	cannot	change	the	world,	but	you	can	present	the	world	with	one	improved	person,
yourself
.	You	can	go	to	work	on	yourself	to	make	yourself	into	the	kind	of	person	you
admire	and	respect.	You	can	become	a	role	model	and	set	a	standard	for	others.	You	can
control	and	discipline	yourself	to	resist	acting	or	speaking	in	a	negative	way	toward
anyone	for	any	reason.	You	can	insist	upon	always	doing	things	the	loving	way	rather
than	the	hurtful	way.
You	can	use	the	
cognitive	control	method
	to	keep	your	mind	calm	and	positive	by
thinking	 kind	 and	 loving	 thoughts	 about	 others.	 You	 can	 short-circuit	 your	 anger	 by
thinking	kindly	about	those	who	hurt	you.	By	saying,	“God	bless	him,”	or	“God	bless
her,”	 rather	 than	 thinking	 about	 how	 much	 he	 or	 she	 is	 exasperating	 you,	 you	 can
neutralize	your	negative	emotions,	restore	your	calmness	and	increase	your	clarity	of
mind.	You	take	another	step	on	the	pathway	toward	becoming	an	exceptional	human
being.
upon.	Your	job	is	to	live	joyously,	and	this	is	only	possible	by	filling	your	mind	with
thoughts	of	love,	compassion	and	forgiveness.
Only	one	life	that	soon	is	past;
Only	what’s	done	with	love	will	last.
This	is	the	secret	of	the	ages,	the	true	foundation	of	all	human	greatness.	It	is	the	core
value	 and	 the	 essential	 unifying	 principle	 of	 truly	 exceptional	 people.	 And	 the	 most
wonderful	thing	about	love	is	that	you	can	fill	your	life	with	it	by	deciding	to	do	so.	The
choice	is	yours.	It	always	has	been.
I	wish	you	luck.	I	wish	you	success	and	happiness.	And	above	all,	I	wish	you	
love
.